<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Case Of Wagner, Nietzsche Contra Wagner, and Selected Aphorisms.</title>
      <author><name reg="Nietzsche, Friedrich">Friedrich Nietzsche.</name></author>
      <editor role="translator"><name reg="Ludovici, Anthony M.">Anthony M. Ludovici.</name></editor>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>April 7, 2008</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">25012</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2008-04-07">April 7, 2008</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Thierry Alberto, David King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
            Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            Page-images available at
            &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/projects/projectID3f8dd143e05cb/&gt;
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03a3">
      <charName>Sigma</charName>
      <desc>GREEK CAPITAL LETTER SIGMA</desc>
      <mapping>S</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03b1">
      <charName>alpha</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA</desc>
      <mapping>a</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03b4">
      <charName>delta</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA</desc>
      <mapping>d</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03b7">
      <charName>eta</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA</desc>
      <mapping>ae</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03ba">
      <charName>kappa</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA</desc>
      <mapping>k</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03bb">
      <charName>lambda</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMBDA</desc>
      <mapping>l</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03bd">
      <charName>nu</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER NU</desc>
      <mapping>n</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c1">
      <charName>rho</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO</desc>
      <mapping>r</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c2">
      <charName>sigmaf</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA</desc>
      <mapping>s</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c4">
      <charName>tau</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU</desc>
      <mapping>t</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c9">
      <charName>omega</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER OMEGA</desc>
      <mapping>o</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1f71">
      <charName>alpha</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA</desc>
      <mapping>a</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1f78">
      <charName>omicron</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH VARIA</desc>
      <mapping>o</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1fb6">
      <charName>alpha</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH PERISPOMENI</desc>
      <mapping>a</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center; bold">Friedrich Nietzsche</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center; bold">I: The Case Of Wagner</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center; bold">II: Nietzsche <hi rend='italic'>Contra</hi> Wagner</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center; bold">III: Selected Aphorisms</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Translated By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Anthony M. Ludovici</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Third Edition</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">T. N. Foulis</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">13 &amp; 15 Frederick Street</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Edinburgh and London</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">1911</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>
  </front>

<body>

<pb n="ix"/><anchor id="Pgix"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Translator's Preface.</head>

<p>
Nietzsche wrote the rough draft of <q>The Case
of Wagner</q> in Turin, during the month of May
1888; he completed it in Sils Maria towards
the end of June of the same year, and it was
published in the following autumn. <q>Nietzsche
<hi rend='italic'>contra</hi> Wagner</q> was written about the middle of
December 1888; but, although it was printed and
corrected before the New Year, it was not published
until long afterwards owing to Nietzsche's complete
breakdown in the first days of 1889.
</p>

<p>
In reading these two essays we are apt to be
deceived, by their virulent and forcible tone, into
believing that the whole matter is a mere cover
for hidden fire,—a mere blind of æsthetic discussion
concealing a deep and implacable personal feud
which demands and will have vengeance. In spite
of all that has been said to the contrary, many
people still hold this view of the two little works
before us; and, as the actual facts are not accessible
to every one, and rumours are more easily believed
than verified, the error of supposing that these
pamphlets were dictated by personal animosity,
and even by Nietzsche's envy of Wagner in his
glory, seems to be a pretty common one. Another
very general error is to suppose that the point at
issue here is not one concerning music at all, but
concerning religion. It is taken for granted that
<pb n="x"/><anchor id="Pgx"/>
the aspirations, the particular quality, the influence,
and the method of an art like music, are matters
quite distinct from the values and the conditions
prevailing in the culture with which it is in
harmony, and that however many Christian
elements may be discovered in Wagnerian texts,
Nietzsche had no right to raise æsthetic objections
because he happened to entertain the extraordinary
view that these Christian elements had also found
their way into Wagnerian music.
</p>

<p>
To both of these views there is but one reply:—they
are absolutely false.
</p>

<p>
In the <q>Ecce Homo,</q> Nietzsche's autobiography,—a
book which from cover to cover and line for
line is sincerity itself—we learn what Wagner
actually meant to Nietzsche. On pages 41, 44,
84, 122, 129, &amp;c, we cannot doubt that Nietzsche
is speaking from his heart,—and what does he say?—In
impassioned tones he admits his profound
indebtedness to the great musician, his love for
him, his gratitude to him,—how Wagner was the
only German who had ever been anything to him—how
his friendship with Wagner constituted the
happiest and most valuable experience of his life,—how
his breach with Wagner almost killed him.
And, when we remember, too, that Wagner on his
part also declared that he was <q>alone</q> after he
had lost <q>that man</q> (Nietzsche), we begin to
perceive that personal bitterness and animosity
are out of the question here. We feel we are on
a higher plane, and that we must not judge these
two men as if they were a couple of little business
people who had had a suburban squabble.
</p>

<pb n="xi"/><anchor id="Pgxi"/>

<p>
Nietzsche declares (<q>Ecce Homo,</q> p. 24) that
he never attacked persons as persons. If he used
a name at all, it was merely as a means to an end,
just as one might use a magnifying glass in order
to make a general, but elusive and intricate fact
more clear and more apparent, and if he used the
name of David Strauss, without bitterness or spite
(for he did not even know the man), when he
wished to personify Culture-Philistinism, so, in
the same spirit, did he use the name of Wagner,
when he wished to personify the general decadence
of modern ideas, values, aspirations and Art.
</p>

<p>
Nietzsche's ambition, throughout his life, was
to regenerate European culture. In the first period
of his relationship with Wagner, he thought that
he had found the man who was prepared to lead
in this direction. For a long while he regarded
his master as the Saviour of Germany, as the
innovator and renovator who was going to arrest
the decadent current of his time and lead men to
a greatness which had died with antiquity. And
so thoroughly did he understand his duties as a
disciple, so wholly was he devoted to this cause,
that, in spite of all his unquestioned gifts and the
excellence of his original achievements, he was for
a long while regarded as a mere <q>literary lackey</q>
in Wagner's service, in all those circles where the
rising musician was most disliked.
</p>

<p>
Gradually, however, as the young Nietzsche developed
and began to gain an independent view
of life and humanity, it seemed to him extremely
doubtful whether Wagner actually was pulling the
same way with him. Whereas, theretofore, he had
<pb n="xii"/><anchor id="Pgxii"/>
identified Wagner's ideals with his own, it now
dawned upon him slowly that the regeneration of
German culture, of European culture, and the transvaluation
of values which would be necessary for this
regeneration, really lay off the track of Wagnerism.
He saw that he had endowed Wagner with a good
deal that was more his own than Wagner's. In his
love he had transfigured the friend, and the composer
of <q>Parsifal</q> and the man of his imagination
were not one. The fact was realised step by step;
disappointment upon disappointment, revelation
after revelation, ultimately brought it home to him,
and though his best instincts at first opposed it, the
revulsion of feeling at last became too strong to
be scouted, and Nietzsche was plunged into the
blackest despair. Had he followed his own human
inclinations, he would probably have remained
Wagner's friend until the end. As it was, however,
he remained loyal to his cause, and this meant
denouncing his former idol.
</p>

<p>
<q>Joyful Wisdom,</q> <q>Thus Spake Zarathustra,</q>
<q>Beyond Good and Evil,</q> <q>The Genealogy of
Morals,</q> <q>The Twilight of the Idols,</q> <q>The Antichrist</q>—all
these books were but so many exhortations
to mankind to step aside from the general
track now trodden by Europeans. And what
happened? Wagner began to write some hard
things about Nietzsche; the world assumed that
Nietzsche and Wagner had engaged in a paltry
personal quarrel in the press, and the whole importance
of the real issue was buried beneath the
human, all-too-human interpretations which were
heaped upon it.
</p>

<pb n="xiii"/><anchor id="Pgxiii"/>

<p>
Nietzsche was a musician of no mean attainments.
For a long while, in his youth, his superiors
had been doubtful whether he should not be
educated for a musical career, so great were his
gifts in this art; and if his mother had not been
offered a six-years' scholarship for her son at the
famous school of Pforta, Nietzsche, the scholar and
philologist, would probably have been an able
composer. When he speaks about music, therefore,
he knows what he is talking about, and when
he refers to Wagner's music in particular, the simple
fact of his long intimacy with Wagner during the
years at Tribschen, is a sufficient guarantee of
his deep knowledge of the subject. Now Nietzsche
was one of the first to recognise that the principles
of art are inextricably bound up with the laws of
life, that an æsthetic dogma may therefore promote
or depress all vital force, and that a picture, a
symphony, a poem or a statue, is just as capable
of being pessimistic, anarchic, Christian or revolutionary,
as a philosophy or a science is. To speak
of a certain class of music as being compatible with
the decline of culture, therefore, was to Nietzsche a
perfectly warrantable association of ideas, and that
is why, throughout his philosophy, so much stress
is laid upon æsthetic considerations.
</p>

<p>
But if in England and America Nietzsche's
attack on Wagner's art may still seem a little
incomprehensible, let it be remembered that the
Continent has long known that Nietzsche was
actually in the right. Every year thousands are now
added to the large party abroad who have ceased
from believing in the great musical revolutionary of
<pb n="xiv"/><anchor id="Pgxiv"/>
the seventies; that he was one with the French
Romanticists and rebels has long since been acknowledged
a fact in select circles, both in France
and Germany, and if we still have Wagner with
us in England, if we still consider Nietzsche as a
heretic, when he declares that <q>Wagner was a
musician for unmusical people,</q> it is only because
we are more removed than we imagine, from all
the great movements, intellectual and otherwise,
which take place on the Continent.
</p>

<p>
In Wagner's music, in his doctrine, in his whole
concept of art, Nietzsche saw the confirmation, the
promotion—aye, even the encouragement, of that
decadence and degeneration which is now rampant
in Europe; and it is for this reason, although to the
end of his life he still loved Wagner, the man and
the friend, that we find him, on the very eve of his
spiritual death, exhorting us to abjure Wagner the
musician and the artist.
</p>

<ab>
Anthony M. Ludovici.
</ab>

</div>

<pb n="xv"/><anchor id="Pgxv"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preface To The Third Edition<note place="foot">It should be
noted that the first and second editions of
these essays on Wagner appeared in pamphlet form, for which
the above first preface was written.</note></head>

<p>
In spite of the adverse criticism with which the
above preface has met at the hands of many reviewers
since the summer of last year, I cannot say that I
should feel justified, even after mature consideration,
in altering a single word or sentence it contains. If
I felt inclined to make any changes at all, these
would take the form of extensive additions, tending
to confirm rather than to modify the general argument
it advances; but, any omissions of which I
may have been guilty in the first place, have been so
fully rectified since, thanks to the publication of the
English translations of Daniel Halévy's and Henri
Lichtenberger's works, <q>The Life of Friedrich
Nietzsche,</q><note place="foot">Fisher Unwin, 1911.</note>
and <q>The Gospel of Superman,</q><note place="foot">T. N. Foulis, 1910.</note>
respectively,
that, were it not for the fact that the
truth about this matter cannot be repeated too often,
I should have refrained altogether from including
any fresh remarks of my own in this Third Edition.
</p>

<p>
In the works just referred to (pp. 129 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi> in
Halévy's book, and pp. 78 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi> in Lichtenberger's
<pb n="xvi"/><anchor id="Pgxvi"/>
book), the statement I made in my preface to
<q>Thoughts out of Season,</q> vol. i., and which I did
not think it necessary to repeat in my first preface
to these pamphlets, will be found to receive the
fullest confirmation.
</p>

<p>
The statement in question was to the effect that
many long years before these pamphlets were even
projected, Nietzsche's apparent <hi rend='italic'>volte-face</hi> in regard
to his hero Wagner had been not only foreshadowed
but actually stated in plain words, in two works
written during his friendship with Wagner,—the
works referred to being <q>The Birth of Tragedy</q>
(1872), and <q>Wagner in Bayreuth</q> (1875) of which
Houston Stuart Chamberlain declares not only that
it possesses <q>undying classical worth</q> but that <q>a
perusal of it is indispensable to all who wish to
follow the question [of Wagner] to its roots.</q><note place="foot">See
<hi rend='italic'>Richard Wagner</hi>, by Houston Stuart Chamberlain
(translated by G. A. Hight), pp. 15, 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
The idea that runs through the present work like
a leitmotif—the idea that Wagner was at bottom
more of a mime than a musician—was so far an
ever present thought with Nietzsche that it is ever
impossible to ascertain the period when it was first
formulated.
</p>

<p>
In Nietzsche's wonderful autobiography (<hi rend='italic'>Ecce
Homo</hi>, p. 88), in the section dealing with the early
works just mentioned, we find the following passage—<q>In
the second of the two essays [Wagner in
Bayreuth] with a profound certainty of instinct, I
already characterised the elementary factor in
Wagner's nature as a theatrical talent which, in all
his means and aspirations, draws its final conclusions.</q>
<pb n="xvii"/><anchor id="Pgxvii"/>
And as early as 1874, Nietzsche wrote in
his diary—<q>Wagner is a born actor. Just as
Goethe was an abortive painter, and Schiller an
abortive orator, so Wagner was an abortive theatrical
genius. His attitude to music is that of the actor;
for he knows how to sing and speak, as it were out
of different souls and from absolutely different worlds
(<hi rend='italic'>Tristan</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>Meistersinger</hi>).</q>
</p>

<p>
There is, however, no need to multiply examples,
seeing, as I have said, that in the translations of
Halévy's and Lichtenberger's books the reader will
find all the independent evidence he could possibly
desire, disproving the popular, and even the learned
belief that, in the two pamphlets before us we have
a complete, apparently unaccountable, and therefore
<q>demented</q> <hi rend='italic'>volte-face</hi> on Nietzsche's part. Nevertheless,
for fear lest some doubt should still linger
in certain minds concerning this point, and with the
view of adding interest to these essays, the Editor
considered it advisable, in the Second Edition, to
add a number of extracts from Nietzsche's diary of
the year 1878 (ten years before <q>The Case of Wagner,</q>
and <q>Nietzsche <hi rend='italic'>contra</hi> Wagner</q> were written)
in order to show to what extent those learned critics
who complain of Nietzsche's <q>morbid and uncontrollable
recantations and revulsions of feeling,</q>
have overlooked even the plain facts of the case when
forming their all-too-hasty conclusions. These extracts
will be found at the end of <q>Nietzsche <hi rend='italic'>contra</hi>
Wagner.</q> While reading them, however, it should
not be forgotten that they were never intended for
publication by Nietzsche himself—a fact which accounts
for their unpolished and sketchy form—and
<pb n="xviii"/><anchor id="Pgxviii"/>
that they were first published in vol. xi. of the first
German Library Edition (pp. 99-129) only when
he was a helpless invalid, in 1897. Since then, in
1901 and 1906 respectively, they have been reprinted,
once in the large German Library Edition
(vol. xi. pp. 181-202), and once in the German
Pocket Edition, as an appendix to <q>Human-All-too-Human,</q>
Part II.
</p>

<p>
An altogether special interest now attaches to
these pamphlets; for, in the first place we are at last
in possession of Wagner's own account of his development,
his art, his aspirations and his struggles,
in the amazing self-revelation entitled <hi rend='italic'>My
Life</hi>;<note place="foot">Constable &amp; Co., 1911.</note>
and secondly, we now have <hi rend='italic'>Ecce Homo</hi>, Nietzsche's
autobiography, in which we learn for the first time
from Nietzsche's own pen to what extent his history
was that of a double devotion—to Wagner on the
one hand, and to his own life task, the Transvaluation
of all Values, on the other.
</p>

<p>
Readers interested in the Nietzsche-Wagner controversy
will naturally look to these books for a final
solution of all the difficulties which the problem
presents. But let them not be too sanguine. From
first to last this problem is not to be settled by
<q>facts.</q> A good deal of instinctive choice, instinctive
aversion, and instinctive suspicion are necessary
here. A little more suspicion, for instance, ought to
be applied to Wagner's <hi rend='italic'>My Life</hi>, especially in England,
where critics are not half suspicious enough
about a continental artist's self-revelations, and are
too prone, if they have suspicions at all, to apply
them in the wrong place.
</p>

<pb n="xix"/><anchor id="Pgxix"/>

<p>
An example of this want of <emph>finesse</emph> in judging
foreign writers is to be found in Lord Morley's work
on Rousseau,—a book which ingenuously takes for
granted everything that a writer like Rousseau cares
to say about himself, without considering for an
instant the possibility that Rousseau might have
practised some hypocrisy. In regard to Wagner's
life we might easily fall into the same error—that is
to say, we might take seriously all he says concerning
himself and his family affairs.
</p>

<p>
We should beware of this, and should not even
believe Wagner when he speaks badly about himself.
No one speaks badly about himself without a
reason, and the question in this case is to find out
the reason. Did Wagner—in the belief that genius
was always immoral—wish to pose as an immoral
Egotist, in order to make us believe in his genius,
of which he himself was none too sure in his innermost
heart? Did Wagner wish to appear <q>sincere</q>
in his biography, in order to awaken in us a belief
in the sincerity of his music, which he likewise
doubted, but wished to impress upon the world as
<q>true</q>? Or did he wish to be thought badly of in
connection with things that were not true, and that
consequently did not affect him, in order to lead us
off the scent of true things, things he was ashamed
of and which he wished the world to ignore—just
like Rousseau (the similarity between the two is
more than a superficial one) who barbarously pretended
to have sent his children to the foundling
hospital, in order not to be thought incapable of
having had any children at all? In short, where is
the bluff in Wagner's biography? Let us therefore
<pb n="xx"/><anchor id="Pgxx"/>
be careful about it, and all the more so because
Wagner himself guarantees the truth of it in the
prefatory note. If we were to be credulous here, we
should moreover be acting in direct opposition to
Nietzsche's own counsel as given in the following
aphorisms (Nos. 19 and 20, p. 89):—
</p>

<p>
<q rend="pre">It is very difficult to trace the course of Wagner's
development,—no trust must be placed in his own
description of his soul's experiences. He writes
party-pamphlets for his followers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is extremely doubtful whether Wagner is
able to bear witness about himself.</q>
</p>

<p>
While on p. 37 (the note), we read:—<q>He
[Wagner] was not proud enough to be able to suffer
the truth about himself. Nobody had less pride
than he. Like Victor Hugo he remained true to
himself even in his biography,—he remained an
actor.</q>
</p>

<p>
However, as a famous English judge has said—<q>Truth
will come out, even in the witness box,</q>
and, as we may add in this case, even in an autobiography.
There is one statement in Wagner's
<hi rend='italic'>My Life</hi> which sounds true to my ears at least—a
statement which, in my opinion, has some importance,
and to which Wagner himself seems to grant
a mysterious significance. I refer to the passage on
p. 93 of vol i., in which Wagner says:—<q>Owing
to the exceptional vivacity and innate susceptibility
of my nature … I gradually became conscious of
a certain power of transporting or bewildering my
more indolent companions.</q>
</p>

<p>
This seems innocent enough. When, however,
it is read in conjunction with Nietzsche's trenchant
<pb n="xxi"/><anchor id="Pgxxi"/>
criticism, particularly on pp. 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18
of this work, and also with a knowledge of Wagner's
music, it becomes one of the most striking passages
in Wagner's autobiography, for it records how soon
he became conscious of his dominant instinct and
faculty.
</p>

<p>
I know perfectly well that the Wagnerites will
not be influenced by these remarks. Their gratitude
to Wagner is too great for this. He has
supplied the precious varnish wherewith to hide
the dull ugliness of our civilisation. He has given
to souls despairing over the materialism of this
world, to souls despairing of themselves, and longing
to be rid of themselves, the indispensable hashish
and morphia wherewith to deaden their inner
discords. These discords are everywhere apparent
nowadays. Wagner is therefore a common need, a
common benefactor. As such he is bound to be
worshipped and adored in spite of all egotistical
and theatrical autobiographies.
</p>

<p>
Albeit, signs are not wanting—at least among his
Anglo-Saxon worshippers who stand even more in
need of romanticism than their continental brethren,—which
show that, in order to uphold Wagner, people
are now beginning to draw distinctions between the
man and the artist. They dismiss the man as
<q>human-all-too-human,</q> but they still maintain that
there are divine qualities in his music. However
distasteful the task of disillusioning these psychological
tyros may be, they should be informed that no
such division of a man into two parts is permissible,
save in Christianity (the body and the soul),
but that outside purely religious spheres it is utterly
<pb n="xxii"/><anchor id="Pgxxii"/>
unwarrantable. There can be no such strange
divorce between a bloom and the plant on which
it blows, and has a black woman ever been known
to give birth to a white child?
</p>

<p>
Wagner, as Nietzsche tells us on p. 19, <q>was
something complete, he was a typical <emph>decadent</emph> in
whom every sign of <q>free will</q> was lacking, in whom
every feature was necessary.</q> Wagner, allow me
to add, was a typical representative of the nineteenth
century, which was the century of contradictory
values, of opposed instincts, and of every kind of inner
disharmony. The genuine, the classical artists of
that period, such men as Heine, Goethe, Stendhal,
and Gobineau, overcame their inner strife, and each
succeeded in making a harmonious whole out of
himself—not indeed without a severe struggle; for
everyone of them suffered from being the child of
his age, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, a decadent. The only difference between
them and the romanticists lies in the fact that they
(the former) were conscious of what was wrong with
them, and possessed the will and the strength to
overcome their illness; whereas the romanticists
chose the easier alternative—namely, that of shutting
their eyes on themselves.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am just as much a child of my age as Wagner—<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
I am a <emph>decadent</emph>,</q> says Nietzsche. <q>The
only difference is that I recognised the fact, that I
struggled against it</q><note place="foot">See Author's Preface to
<q>The Case of Wagner</q> in this volume.</note>
</p>

<p>
What Wagner did was characteristic of all romanticists
and contemporary artists: he drowned
and overshouted his inner discord by means of
<pb n="xxiii"/><anchor id="Pgxxiii"/>
exuberant pathos and wild exaltation. Far be it
from me to value Wagner's music <hi rend='italic'>in extenso</hi> here—this
is scarcely a fitting opportunity to do so;—but
I think it might well be possible to show, on
purely psychological grounds, how impossible it was
for a man like Wagner to produce real art. For how
can harmony, order, symmetry, mastery, proceed
from uncontrolled discord, disorder, disintegration,
and chaos? The fact that an art which springs
from such a marshy soil may, like certain paludal
plants, be <q>wonderful,</q> <q>gorgeous,</q> and <q>overwhelming,</q>
cannot be denied; but true art it is not. It is
so just as little as Gothic architecture is,—that style
which, in its efforts to escape beyond the tragic contradiction
in its mediæval heart, yelled its hysterical
cry heavenwards and even melted the stones of its
structures into a quivering and fluid jet, in order to
give adequate expression to the painful and wretched
conflict then raging between the body and the soul.
</p>

<p>
That Wagner, too, was a great sufferer, there can
be no doubt; not, however, a sufferer from strength,
like a true artist, but from weakness—the weakness
of his age, which he never overcame. It is for this
reason that he should be rather pitied than judged
as he is now being judged by his German and
English critics, who, with thoroughly neurotic suddenness,
have acknowledged their revulsion of feeling
a little too harshly.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have carefully endeavoured not to deride, or
deplore, or detest…</q> says Spinoza, <q>but to understand</q>;
and these words ought to be our guide, not
only in the case of Wagner, but in all things.
</p>

<p>
Inner discord is a terrible affliction, and nothing
<pb n="xxiv"/><anchor id="Pgxxiv"/>
is so certain to produce that nervous irritability
which is so trying to the patient as well as to the
outer world, as this so-called spiritual disease.
Nietzsche was probably quite right when he said
the only real and true music that Wagner ever composed
did not consist of his elaborate arias and overtures,
but of ten or fifteen bars which, dispersed here
and there, gave expression to the composer's profound
and genuine melancholy. But this melancholy
had to be overcome, and Wagner with the blood of
a <hi rend='italic'>cabotin</hi> in his veins, resorted to the remedy that
was nearest to hand—that is to say, the art of
bewildering others and himself. Thus he remained
ignorant about himself all his life; for there was, as
Nietzsche rightly points out (<ref target="Pg037">p. 37</ref>,
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi>), not sufficient
pride in the man for him to desire to know or
to suffer gladly the truth concerning his real nature.
As an actor his ruling passion was vanity, but in
his case it was correlated with a semi-conscious
knowledge of the fact that all was not right with
him and his art. It was this that caused him to
suffer. His egomaniacal behaviour and his almost
Rousseauesque fear and suspicion of others were
only the external manifestations of his inner discrepancies.
But, to repeat what I have already said,
these abnormal symptoms are not in the least
incompatible with Wagner's music, they are rather
its very cause, the root from which it springs.
</p>

<p>
In reality, therefore, Wagner the man and Wagner
the artist were undoubtedly one, and constituted
a splendid romanticist. His music as well as his
autobiography are proofs of his wonderful gifts in
this direction. His success in his time, as in ours,
<pb n="xxv"/><anchor id="Pgxxv"/>
is due to the craving of the modern world for actors,
sorcerers, bewilderers and idealists who are able to
conceal the ill-health and the weakness that prevail,
and who please by intoxicating and exalting. But
this being so, the world must not be disappointed
to find the hero of a preceding age explode in the
next. It must not be astonished to find a disparity
between the hero's private life and his <q>elevating</q> art
or romantic and idealistic gospel. As long as people
will admire heroic attitudes more than heroism, such
disillusionment is bound to be the price of their error.
In a truly great man, life-theory and life-practice,
if seen from a sufficiently lofty point of view, must
and do always agree, in an actor, in a romanticist,
in an idealist, and in a Christian, there is always a
yawning chasm between the two, which, whatever
well-meaning critics may do, cannot be bridged
posthumously by acrobatic feats <hi rend='italic'>in psychologicis</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Let anyone apply this point of view to Nietzsche's
life and theory. Let anyone turn his life inside
out, not only as he gives it to us in his <hi rend='italic'>Ecce Homo</hi>,
but as we find it related by all his biographers,
friends and foes alike, and what will be the result?
Even if we ignore his works—the blooms which
blowed from time to time from his life—we absolutely
cannot deny the greatness of the man's <emph>private
practice</emph>, and if we fully understand and appreciate
the latter, we must be singularly deficient in instinct
and in <emph>flair</emph> if we do not suspect that some of this
greatness is reflected in his life-task.
</p>

<ab>
ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI
</ab>

<p>
London, <hi rend='italic'>July 1911</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="xxviii"/><anchor id="Pgxxviii"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>The Case Of Wagner: A Musician's Problem</head>

<p>
A LETTER FROM TURIN, MAY 1888
</p>

<p>
<q>RIDENDO DICERE SEVERUM.…</q>
</p>

<pb n="xxix"/><anchor id="Pgxxix"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
I am writing this to relieve my mind. It is not
malice alone which makes me praise Bizet at the
expense of Wagner in this essay. Amid a good
deal of jesting I wish to make one point clear
which does not admit of levity. To turn my back
on Wagner was for me a piece of fate, to get to
like anything else whatever afterwards was for me
a triumph. Nobody, perhaps, had ever been more
dangerously involved in Wagnerism, nobody had
defended himself more obstinately against it,
nobody had ever been so overjoyed at ridding
himself of it. A long history!—Shall I give it a
name?—If I were a moralist, who knows what I
might not call it! Perhaps a piece of <emph>self-mastery</emph>.—But
the philosopher does not like the moralist,
neither does he like high-falutin' words.…
</p>

<p>
What is the first and last thing that a philosopher
demands of himself? To overcome his age in
himself, to become <q>timeless.</q> With what then
does the philosopher have the greatest fight?
With all that in him which makes him the child of
his time. Very well then! I am just as much a
child of my age as Wagner—<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, I am a decadent.
The only difference is that I recognised the fact,
<pb n="xxx"/><anchor id="Pgxxx"/>
that I struggled against it. The philosopher in
me struggled against it.
</p>

<p>
My greatest preoccupation hitherto has been
the problem of <emph>decadence</emph>, and I had reasons for
this. <q>Good and evil</q> form only a playful subdivision
of this problem. If one has trained one's
eye to detect the symptoms of decline, one also
understands morality,—one understands what lies
concealed beneath its holiest names and tables of
values: <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, <emph>impoverished</emph> life,
the will to nonentity,
great exhaustion. Morality <emph>denies</emph> life.… In
order to undertake such a mission I was obliged to
exercise self-discipline:—I had to side against all
that was morbid in myself including Wagner,
including Schopenhauer, including the whole of
modern <emph>humanity</emph>.—A profound estrangement,
coldness and soberness towards all that belongs
to my age, all that was contemporary: and as the
highest wish, Zarathustra's eye, an eye which
surveys the whole phenomenon—mankind—from
an enormous distance,—which looks down upon
it.—For such a goal—what sacrifice would not have
been worth while? What <q>self-mastery</q>! What
<q>self-denial</q>!
</p>

<p>
The greatest event of my life took the form of
a <emph>recovery</emph>. Wagner belongs only to my diseases.
</p>

<p>
Not that I wish to appear ungrateful to this
disease. If in this essay I support the proposition
that Wagner is <emph>harmful</emph>, I none the less wish to
<pb n="xxxi"/><anchor id="Pgxxxi"/>
point out unto whom, in spite of all, he is indispensable—to
the philosopher. Anyone else may
perhaps be able to get on without Wagner: but
the philosopher is not free to pass him by. The
philosopher must be the evil conscience of his age,—but
to this end he must be possessed of its best
knowledge. And what better guide, or more
thoroughly efficient revealer of the soul, could be
found for the labyrinth of the modern spirit than
Wagner? Through Wagner modernity speaks her
most intimate language: it conceals neither its
good nor its evil: it has thrown off all shame.
And, conversely, one has almost calculated the
whole of the value of modernity once one is clear
concerning what is good and evil in Wagner.
I can perfectly well understand a musician of
to-day who says: <q>I hate Wagner but I can
endure no other music.</q> But I should also
understand a philosopher who said, <q>Wagner is
modernity in concentrated form.</q> There is no
help for it, we must first be Wagnerites.…
</p>

</div>

<pb n="001"/><anchor id="Pg001"/>

<div>
<head>1.</head>

<p>
Yesterday—would you believe it?—I heard <hi rend='italic'>Bizet's</hi>
masterpiece for the twentieth time. Once more I
attended with the same gentle reverence; once
again I did not run away. This triumph over my
impatience surprises me. How such a work completes
one! Through it one almost becomes a
<q>masterpiece</q> oneself—And, as a matter of fact,
each time I heard <hi rend='italic'>Carmen</hi> it seemed to me that I
was more of a philosopher, a better philosopher
than at other times: I became so forbearing, so
happy, so Indian, so <emph>settled</emph>.… To sit for five
hours: the first step to holiness!—May I be allowed
to say that Bizet's orchestration is the only one
that I can endure now? That other orchestration
which is all the rage at present—the Wagnerian—is
brutal, artificial and <q>unsophisticated</q> withal,
hence its appeal to all the three senses of the
modern soul at once. How terribly Wagnerian
orchestration affects me! I call it the <hi rend='italic'>Sirocco</hi>. A
disagreeable sweat breaks out all over me. All my
fine weather vanishes.
</p>

<p>
Bizet's music seems to me perfect. It comes
forward lightly, gracefully, stylishly. It is lovable,
<pb n="002"/><anchor id="Pg002"/>
it does not sweat. <q>All that is good is easy, everything
divine runs with light feet</q>: this is the first
principle of my æsthetics. This music is wicked,
refined, fatalistic, and withal remains popular,—it
possesses the refinement of a race, not of an
individual. It is rich. It is definite. It builds,
organises, completes, and in this sense it stands
as a contrast to the polypus in music, to <q>endless
melody</q>. Have more painful, more tragic accents
ever been heard on the stage before? And how
are they obtained? Without grimaces! Without
counterfeiting of any kind! Free from the <emph>lie</emph> of
the grand style!—In short: this music assumes
that the listener is intelligent even as a musician,—thereby
it is the opposite of Wagner, who, apart
from everything else, was in any case the most <emph>ill-mannered</emph>
genius on earth (Wagner takes us as if … ,
he repeats a thing so often that we become
desperate,—that we ultimately believe it).
</p>

<p>
And once more: I become a better man when
Bizet speaks to me. Also a better musician, a
better <emph>listener</emph>. Is it in any way possible to listen
better?—I even burrow behind this music with my
ears. I hear its very cause. I seem to assist at its
birth. I tremble before the dangers which this
daring music runs, I am enraptured over those
happy accidents for which even Bizet himself may
not be responsible.—And, strange to say, at bottom
I do not give it a thought, or am not aware how
much thought I really do give it. For quite other
ideas are running through my head the while.…
Has any one ever observed that music <emph>emancipates</emph>
the spirit? gives wings to thought? and that the
<pb n="003"/><anchor id="Pg003"/>
more one becomes a musician the more one is also
a philosopher? The grey sky of abstraction seems
thrilled by flashes of lightning; the light is strong
enough to reveal all the details of things; to
enable one to grapple with problems; and the
world is surveyed as if from a mountain top—With
this I have defined philosophical pathos—And
unexpectedly <emph>answers</emph> drop into my lap, a small
hailstorm of ice and wisdom, of problems <emph>solved</emph>.
Where am I? Bizet makes me productive. Everything
that is good makes me productive. I have
gratitude for nothing else, nor have I any other
touchstone for testing what is good.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2.</head>

<p>
Bizet's work also saves; Wagner is not the only
<q>Saviour.</q> With it one bids farewell to the <emph>damp</emph>
north and to all the fog of the Wagnerian ideal.
Even the action in itself delivers us from these
things. From Merimée it has this logic even in
passion, from him it has the direct line, <emph>inexorable</emph>
necessity, but what it has above all else is that
which belongs to sub-tropical zones—that dryness
of atmosphere, that <hi rend='italic'>limpidezza</hi> of the air. Here in
every respect the climate is altered. Here another
kind of sensuality, another kind of sensitiveness
and another kind of cheerfulness make their appeal.
This music is gay, but not in a French or German
way. Its gaiety is African; fate hangs over it, its
happiness is short, sudden, without reprieve. I
envy Bizet for having had the courage of this
sensitiveness, which hitherto in the cultured music
<pb n="004"/><anchor id="Pg004"/>
of Europe has found no means of expression,—of
this southern, tawny, sunburnt sensitiveness.…
What a joy the golden afternoon of its happiness is
to us! When we look out, with this music in our
minds, we wonder whether we have ever seen the
sea so <emph>calm</emph>. And how soothing is this Moorish
dancing! How, for once, even our insatiability
gets sated by its lascivious melancholy!—And
finally love, love translated back into <emph>Nature</emph>!
Not the love of a <q>cultured girl!</q>—no Senta-sentimentality.<note
place="foot">Senta is the heroine in the <q>Flying
Dutchman</q>—<hi rend='italic'>Tr.</hi></note>
But love as fate, as a fatality,
cynical, innocent, cruel,—and precisely in this way
<emph>Nature</emph>! The love whose means is war, whose
very essence is the <emph>mortal hatred</emph> between the
sexes!—I know no case in which the tragic irony,
which constitutes the kernel of love, is expressed
with such severity, or in so terrible a formula, as
in the last cry of Don José with which the work
ends:
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend="pre">Yes, it is I who have killed her,</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">I—my adored Carmen!</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
—Such a conception of love (the only one worthy
of a philosopher) is rare: it distinguishes one
work of art from among a thousand others. For,
as a rule, artists are no better than the rest of the
world, they are even worse—they <emph>misunderstand</emph>
love. Even Wagner misunderstood it. They imagine
that they are selfless in it because they appear
to be seeking the advantage of another creature
often to their own disadvantage. But in return
they want to <emph>possess</emph> the other creature.… Even
<pb n="005"/><anchor id="Pg005"/>
God is no exception to this rule, he is very far from
thinking <q>What does it matter to thee whether I
love thee or not?</q>—He becomes terrible if he is
not loved in return <q><hi rend='italic'>L'amour</hi>—and with this
principle one carries one's point against Gods and
men—<hi rend='italic'>est de tous les sentiments le plus égoiste, et
par conséquent, lorsqu'il est blessé, le moins généreux</hi></q>
(B. Constant).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3.</head>

<p>
Perhaps you are beginning to perceive how very
much this music <emph>improves</emph> me?—<hi rend='italic'>Il
faut méditerraniser
la musique.</hi> and I have my reasons for this
principle (<q>Beyond Good and Evil,</q> pp. 216 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>)
The return to Nature, health, good spirits, youth,
<emph>virtue</emph>!—And yet I was one of the most corrupted
Wagnerites.… I was able to take Wagner
seriously. Oh, this old magician! what tricks
has he not played upon us! The first thing his
art places in our hands is a magnifying glass: we
look through it, and we no longer trust our own
eyes—Everything grows bigger, <emph>even Wagner grows
bigger</emph>.… What a clever rattlesnake. Throughout
his life he rattled <q>resignation,</q> <q>loyalty,</q>
and <q>purity</q> about our ears, and he retired from
the <emph>corrupt</emph> world with a song of praise to chastity!—And
we believed it all.…
</p>

<p>
—But you will not listen to me? You <emph>prefer</emph>
even the <emph>problem</emph> of Wagner to that of Bizet? But
neither do I underrate it; it has its charm. The
problem of salvation is even a venerable problem.
Wagner pondered over nothing so deeply as over
salvation: his opera is the opera of salvation.
<pb n="006"/><anchor id="Pg006"/>
Someone always wants to be saved in his operas,—now
it is a youth; anon it is a maid,—this is <emph>his
problem</emph>—And how lavishly he varies his <hi rend='italic'>leitmotif</hi>!
What rare and melancholy modulations! If it were
not for Wagner, who would teach us that innocence
has a preference for saving interesting sinners?
(the case in <q>Tannhauser</q>). Or that even the eternal
Jew gets saved and <emph>settled down</emph> when he marries?
(the case in the <q>Flying Dutchman</q>). Or that
corrupted old females prefer to be saved by chaste
young men? (the case of Kundry). Or that young
hysterics like to be saved by their doctor? (the
case in <q>Lohengrin</q>). Or that beautiful girls most
love to be saved by a knight who also happens to
be a Wagnerite? (the case in the <q>Mastersingers</q>).
Or that even married women also like to be saved
by a knight? (the case of Isolde). Or that the
venerable Almighty, after having compromised
himself morally in all manner of ways, is at last
delivered by a free spirit and an immoralist? (the
case in the <q>Ring</q>). Admire, more especially this
last piece of wisdom! Do you understand it?
I—take good care not to understand it.… That
it is possible to draw yet other lessons from the
works above mentioned,—I am much more ready
to prove than to dispute. That one may be driven
by a Wagnerian ballet to desperation—<emph>and</emph> to
virtue! (once again the case in <q>Tannhauser</q>).
That not going to bed at the right time may be
followed by the worst consequences (once again
the case of <q>Lohengrin</q>).—That one can never be
too sure of the spouse one actually marries (for the
third time, the case of <q>Lohengrin</q>). <q>Tristan and
<pb n="007"/><anchor id="Pg007"/>
Isolde</q> glorifies the perfect husband who, in a
certain case, can ask only one question: <q>But why
have ye not told me this before? Nothing could
be simpler than that!</q> Reply:
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend="pre">That I cannot tell thee.</q></l>
<l>And what thou askest,</l>
<l><q rend="post">That wilt thou never learn.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q>Lohengrin</q> contains a solemn ban upon all investigation
and questioning. In this way Wagner
stood for the Christian concept, <q>Thou must and
shalt <emph>believe</emph></q>. It is a crime against the highest
and the holiest to be scientific.… The <q>Flying
Dutchman</q> preaches the sublime doctrine that
woman can moor the most erratic soul, or to put
it into Wagnerian terms <q>save</q> him. Here we
venture to ask a question. Supposing that this
were actually true, would it therefore be desirable?—What
becomes of the <q>eternal Jew</q> whom a
woman adores and <emph>enchains</emph>? He simply ceases
from being eternal, he marries,—that is to say, he
concerns us no longer.—Transferred into the realm
of reality, the danger for the artist and for the
genius—and these are of course the <q>eternal Jews</q>—resides
in woman: <emph>adoring</emph> women are their ruin.
Scarcely any one has sufficient character not to be
corrupted—<q>saved</q> when he finds himself treated
as a God—he then immediately condescends to
woman.—Man is a coward in the face of all that is
eternally feminine, and this the girls know.—In
many cases of woman's love, and perhaps precisely
in the most famous ones, the love is no more than
a refined form of <emph>parasitism</emph>, a making one's nest in
<pb n="008"/><anchor id="Pg008"/>
another's soul and sometimes even in another's
flesh—Ah! and how constantly at the cost of the
host!
</p>

<p>
We know the fate of Goethe in old-maidish
moralin-corroded Germany. He was always offensive
to Germans, he found honest admirers only
among Jewesses. Schiller, <q>noble</q> Schiller, who
cried flowery words into their ears,—he was a man
after their own heart. What did they reproach
Goethe with?—with the Mount of Venus, and with
having composed certain Venetian epigrams. Even
Klopstock preached him a moral sermon; there
was a time when Herder was fond of using the
word <q>Priapus</q> when he spoke of Goethe. Even
<q>Wilhelm Meister</q> seemed to be only a symptom
of decline, of a moral <q>going to the dogs</q>. The
<q>Menagerie of tame cattle,</q> the worthlessness of
the hero in this book, revolted Niebuhr, who finally
bursts out in a plaint which <hi rend='italic'>Biterolf</hi><note
place="foot">A character in <q>Tannhauser.</q>—<hi rend='italic'>Tr</hi>.</note>
might well have sung: <q>nothing so easily makes a painful
impression as <emph>when a great mind despoils itself of its
wings and strives for virtuosity in something greatly
inferior, while it renounces more lofty aims</emph>.</q> But
the most indignant of all was the cultured woman—all
smaller courts in Germany, every kind of <q>Puritanism</q>
made the sign of the cross at the sight of
Goethe, at the thought of the <q>unclean spirit</q> in
Goethe.—This history was what Wagner set to
music. He <emph>saves</emph> Goethe, that goes without
saying; but he does so in such a clever way that
he also takes the side of the cultured woman.
<pb n="009"/><anchor id="Pg009"/>
Goethe gets saved: a prayer saves him, a cultured
woman <emph>draws him out of the mire</emph>.
</p>

<p>
—As to what Goethe would have thought of
Wagner?—Goethe once set himself the question,
<q>what danger hangs over all romanticists—the fate
of romanticists?</q>—His answer was: <q>To choke
over the rumination of moral and religious absurdities.</q>
In short: <hi rend='italic'>Parsifal</hi>.… The philosopher
writes thereto an epilogue: <emph>Holiness</emph>—the only
remaining higher value still seen by the mob or by
woman, the horizon of the ideal for all those who
are naturally short-sighted. To philosophers, however,
this horizon, like every other, is a mere
misunderstanding, a sort of slamming of the door
in the face of the real beginning of their world,—their
danger, their ideal, their desideratum.… In
more polite language: <hi rend='italic'>La philosophie ne suffit pas au
grand nombre. Il lui faut la sainteté.…</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>4.</head>

<p>
I shall once more relate the history of the
<q>Ring</q>. This is its proper place. It is also the
history of a salvation except that in this case
it is Wagner himself who is saved—Half his lifetime
Wagner believed in the <emph>Revolution</emph> as only a
Frenchman could have believed in it. He sought
it in the runic inscriptions of myths, he thought he
had found a typical revolutionary in Siegfried.—<q>Whence
arises all the evil in this world?</q>
Wagner asked himself. From <q>old contracts</q>:
he replied, as all revolutionary ideologists have
done. In plain English: from customs, laws,
<pb n="010"/><anchor id="Pg010"/>
morals, institutions, from all those things upon
which the ancient world and ancient society rests.
<q>How can one get rid of the evil in this world?
How can one get rid of ancient society?</q> Only
by declaring war against <q>contracts</q> (traditions,
morality). <emph>This Siegfried does.</emph> He starts early
at the game, very early—his origin itself is already
a declaration of war against morality—he is the
result of adultery, of incest.… Not the saga,
but Wagner himself is the inventor of this radical
feature, in this matter he <emph>corrected</emph> the saga.…
Siegfried continues as he began: he follows only
his first impulse, he flings all tradition, all respect,
all <emph>fear</emph> to the winds. Whatever displeases him he
strikes down. He tilts irreverently at old god-heads.
His principal undertaking, however, is to
emancipate woman,—<q>to deliver Brunnhilda.</q>…
Siegfried and Brunnhilda, the sacrament of free
love, the dawn of the golden age, the twilight of
the Gods of old morality—<emph>evil is got rid of</emph>.…
For a long while Wagner's ship sailed happily
along this course. There can be no doubt that
along it Wagner sought his highest goal.—What
happened? A misfortune. The ship dashed on
to a reef; Wagner had run aground. The reef was
Schopenhauer's philosophy; Wagner had stuck
fast on a <emph>contrary</emph> view of the world. What had
he set to music? Optimism? Wagner was
ashamed. It was moreover an optimism for which
Schopenhauer had devised an evil expression,—<emph>unscrupulous</emph>
optimism. He was more than ever
ashamed. He reflected for some time; his position
seemed desperate.… At last a path of escape
<pb n="011"/><anchor id="Pg011"/>
seemed gradually to open before him—what if the
reef on which he had been wrecked could be
interpreted as a goal, as the ulterior motive, as the
actual purpose of his journey? To be wrecked
here, this was also a goal:—<hi rend='italic'>Bene navigavi cum
naufragium feci</hi> … and he translated the <q>Ring</q>
into Schopenhauerian language. Everything goes
wrong, everything goes to wrack and ruin, the new
world is just as bad as the old one:—Nonentity,
the Indian Circe beckons … Brunnhilda, who
according to the old plan had to retire with a song
in honour of free love, consoling the world with the
hope of a socialistic Utopia in which <q>all will be
well</q>; now gets something else to do. She must
first study Schopenhauer. She must first versify
the fourth book of <q>The World as Will and Idea.</q>
<emph>Wagner was saved.…</emph> Joking apart, this
<emph>was</emph> a
salvation. The service which Wagner owes to
Schopenhauer is incalculable. It was the <emph>philosopher
of decadence</emph> who allowed the <emph>artist of decadence</emph>
to find himself.—
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>5.</head>

<p>
<emph>The artist of decadence.</emph> That is the word. And
here I begin to be serious. I could not think of
looking on approvingly while this <hi rend='italic'>décadent</hi> spoils
our health—and music into the bargain. Is Wagner
a man at all? Is he not rather a disease? Everything
he touches he contaminates. <emph>He has made
music sick.</emph>
</p>

<p>
A typical <hi rend='italic'>décadent</hi> who thinks himself necessary
with his corrupted taste, who arrogates to himself
<pb n="012"/><anchor id="Pg012"/>
a higher taste, who tries to establish his depravity
as a law, as progress, as a fulfilment.
</p>

<p>
And no one guards against it. His powers of
seduction attain monstrous proportions, holy incense
hangs around him, the misunderstanding
concerning him is called the Gospel,—and he has
certainly not converted only the <emph>poor in spirit</emph> to
his cause!
</p>

<p>
I should like to open the window a little:—Air!
More air!—
</p>

<p>
The fact that people in Germany deceive themselves
concerning Wagner does not surprise me.
The reverse would surprise me. The Germans
have modelled a Wagner for themselves, whom
they can honour: never yet have they been psychologists;
they are thankful that they misunderstand.
But that people should also deceive themselves
concerning Wagner in Paris! Where people
are scarcely anything else than psychologists. And
in Saint Petersburg! Where things are divined,
which even Paris has no idea of. How intimately
related must Wagner be to the entire decadence
of Europe for her not to have felt that he was
decadent! He belongs to it, he is its protagonist,
its greatest name.… We bring honour on ourselves
by elevating him to the clouds—For the
mere fact that no one guards against him is in
itself already a sign of decadence. Instinct is
weakened, what ought to be eschewed now attracts.
People actually kiss that which plunges them more
quickly into the abyss.—Is there any need for an
example? One has only to think of the régime
which anæmic, or gouty, or diabetic people prescribe
<pb n="013"/><anchor id="Pg013"/>
for themselves. The definition of a vegetarian:
a creature who has need of a corroborating
diet. To recognise what is harmful as harmful, to
be able to deny oneself what is harmful, is a sign
of youth, of vitality. That which is harmful lures
the exhausted: cabbage lures the vegetarian.
Illness itself can be a stimulus to life but one
must be healthy enough for such a stimulus!—Wagner
increases exhaustion—<emph>therefore</emph> he attracts
the weak and exhausted to him. Oh, the rattlesnake
joy of the old Master precisely because he
always saw <q>the little children</q> coming unto
him!
</p>

<p>
I place this point of view first and foremost:
Wagner's art is diseased. The problems he sets
on the stage are all concerned with hysteria; the
convulsiveness of his emotions, his over-excited
sensitiveness, his taste which demands ever sharper
condimentation, his erraticness which he togged
out to look like principles, and, last but not least,
his choice of heroes and heroines, considered as
physiological types (—a hospital ward!—): the
whole represents a morbid picture; of this there
can be no doubt. <hi rend='italic'>Wagner est une névrose</hi>. Maybe,
that nothing is better known to-day, or in any case
the subject of greater study, than the Protean
character of degeneration which has disguised itself
here, both as an art and as an artist. In Wagner
our medical men and physiologists have a most
interesting case, or at least a very complete one.
Owing to the very fact that nothing is more
modern than this thorough morbidness, this dilatoriness
and excessive irritability of the nervous
<pb n="014"/><anchor id="Pg014"/>
machinery, Wagner is the <emph>modern artist par
excellence</emph>, the Cagliostro of modernity. All that
the world most needs to-day, is combined in the
most seductive manner in his art,—the three great
stimulants of exhausted people: <emph>brutality</emph>,
<emph>artificiality</emph>
and <emph>innocence</emph> (idiocy).
</p>

<p>
Wagner is a great corrupter of music. With it,
he found the means of stimulating tired nerves,—and
in this way he made music ill. In the art of
spurring exhausted creatures back into activity,
and of recalling half-corpses to life, the inventiveness
he shows is of no mean order. He is the
master of hypnotic trickery, and he fells the
strongest like bullocks. Wagner's <emph>success</emph>—his
success with nerves, and therefore with women—converted
the whole world of ambitious musicians
into disciples of his secret art. And not only the
ambitious, but also the <emph>shrewd</emph>.… Only with
morbid music can money be made to-day; our big
theatres live on Wagner.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>6.</head>

<p>
—Once more I will venture to indulge in a little
levity. Let us suppose that Wagner's <emph>success</emph> could
become flesh and blood and assume a human form;
that, dressed up as a good-natured musical savant,
it could move among budding artists. How do
you think it would then be likely to express
itself?—
</p>

<p>
My friends, it would say, let us exchange a word
or two in private. It is easier to compose bad music
than good music. But what, if apart from this it
<pb n="015"/><anchor id="Pg015"/>
were also more profitable, more effective, more
convincing, more exalting, more secure, more
<emph>Wagnerian</emph>?… <hi rend='italic'>Pulchrum est paucorum
hominum.</hi> Bad enough in all conscience! We understand
Latin, and perhaps we also understand which side
our bread is buttered. Beauty has its drawbacks:
we know that. Wherefore beauty then? Why
not rather aim at size, at the sublime, the gigantic,
that which moves the <emph>masses</emph>?—And to repeat, it
is easier to be titanic than to be beautiful; we
know that.…
</p>

<p>
We know the masses, we know the theatre. The
best of those who assemble there,—German youths,
horned Siegfrieds and other Wagnerites, require
the sublime, the profound, and the overwhelming.
This much still lies within our power. And as for
the others who assemble there,—the cultured <hi rend='italic'>crétins</hi>,
the <hi rend='italic'>blasé</hi> pigmies, the eternally feminine, the
gastrically happy, in short the people—they also
require the sublime, the profound, the overwhelming.
All these people argue in the same way.
<q>He who overthrows us is strong; he who elevates
us is godly; he who makes us wonder vaguely is
profound.</q>—Let us make up our mind then, my
friends in music: we do want to overthrow them,
we do want to elevate them, we do want to make
them wonder vaguely. This much still lies within
our powers.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the process of making them wonder:
it is here that our notion of <q>style</q> finds its starting-point.
Above all, no thoughts! Nothing is
more compromising than a thought! But the
state of mind which <emph>precedes</emph> thought, the labour
<pb n="016"/><anchor id="Pg016"/>
of the thought still unborn, the promise of future
thought, the world as it was before God created it—a
recrudescence of chaos.… Chaos makes
people wonder.…
</p>

<p>
In the words of the master: infinity but without
melody.
</p>

<p>
In the second place, with regard to the overthrowing,—this
belongs at least in part, to physiology.
Let us, in the first place, examine the instruments.
A few of them would convince even
our intestines (—they <emph>throw open</emph> doors, as Handel
would say), others becharm our very marrow. The
<emph>colour of the melody is</emph> all-important here, <emph>the
melody itself</emph> is of no importance. Let us be
precise about <emph>this</emph> point. To what other purpose
should we spend our strength? Let us be characteristic
in tone even to the point of foolishness!
If by means of tones we allow plenty of scope for
guessing, this will be put to the credit of our
intellects. Let us irritate nerves, let us strike
them dead: let us handle thunder and lightning,—that
is what overthrows.…
</p>

<p>
But what overthrows best, is <emph>passion</emph>.—We must
try and be clear concerning this question of passion.
Nothing is cheaper than passion! All the virtues
of counterpoint may be dispensed with, there is no
need to have learnt anything,—but passion is
always within our reach! Beauty is difficult: let
us beware of beauty!… And also of <emph>melody!</emph>
However much in earnest we may otherwise be
about the ideal, let us slander, my friends, let us
slander,—let us slander melody! Nothing is more
dangerous than a beautiful melody! Nothing is
<pb n="017"/><anchor id="Pg017"/>
more certain to ruin taste! My friends, if people
again set about loving beautiful melodies, we are
lost!…
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First principle</hi>: melody is immoral. <hi rend='italic'>Proof</hi>:
<q>Palestrina</q>. <hi rend='italic'>Application</hi>: <q>Parsifal.</q> The absence
of melody is in itself sanctifying.…
</p>

<p>
And this is the definition of passion. Passion—or
the acrobatic feats of ugliness on the tight-rope
of enharmonic—My friends, let us dare to be ugly!
Wagner dared it! Let us heave the mud of the
most repulsive harmonies undauntedly before us.
We must not even spare our hands! Only thus,
shall we become <emph>natural</emph>.…
</p>

<p>
And now a last word of advice. Perhaps it
covers everything—<emph>Let us be idealists!</emph>—If not the
cleverest, it is at least the wisest thing we can do.
In order to elevate men we ourselves must be
exalted. Let us wander in the clouds, let us
harangue eternity, let us be careful to group great
symbols all around us! <hi rend='italic'>Sursum! Bumbum!</hi>—there
is no better advice. The <q>heaving breast</q>
shall be our argument, <q>beautiful feelings</q> our
advocates. Virtue still carries its point against
counterpoint. <q>How could he who improves us,
help being better than we?</q> man has ever thought
thus. Let us therefore improve mankind!—in this
way we shall become good (in this way we shall even
become <q>classics</q>—Schiller became a <q>classic</q>).
The straining after the base excitement of the
senses, after so-called beauty, shattered the nerves
of the Italians: let us remain German! Even
Mozart's relation to music—Wagner spoke this
word of comfort to us—was at bottom frivolous.…
</p>

<pb n="018"/><anchor id="Pg018"/>

<p>
Never let us acknowledge that music <q>may be a
recreation,</q> that it may <q>enliven,</q> that it may
<q>give pleasure.</q> <emph>Never let us give pleasure!</emph>—we
shall be lost if people once again think of music
hedonistically.… That belongs to the bad
eighteenth century.… On the other hand,
nothing would be more advisable (between ourselves)
than a dose of—<hi rend='italic'>cant, sit venia verbo</hi>. This
imparts dignity.—And let us take care to select
the precise moment when it would be fitting to
have black looks, to sigh openly, to sigh devoutly,
to flaunt grand Christian sympathy before their
eyes. <q>Man is corrupt who will save him? <emph>what
will save him?</emph></q> Do not let us reply. We must
be on our guard. We must control our ambition,
which would bid us found new religions. But no
one must doubt that it is <emph>we</emph> who save him, that in
<emph>our</emph> music alone salvation is to be found.…
(See Wagner's essay, <q>Religion and Art.</q>)
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>7.</head>

<p>
Enough! Enough! I fear that, beneath all my
merry jests, you are beginning to recognise the
sinister truth only too clearly—the picture of the
decline of art, of the decline of the artist. The
latter, which is a decline of character, might perhaps
be defined provisionally in the following manner:
the musician is now becoming an actor, his art is
developing ever more and more into a talent for
<emph>telling lies</emph>. In a certain chapter of my principal
work which bears the title <q>Concerning the Physiology
<pb n="019"/><anchor id="Pg019"/>
of Art,</q><note place="foot">See <q>The Will to Power,</q> vol.
ii., authorised English
edition.—<hi rend='italic'>Tr.</hi></note>
I shall have an opportunity of
showing more thoroughly how this transformation
of art as a whole into histrionics is just as much
a sign of physiological degeneration (or more
precisely a form of hysteria), as any other individual
corruption, and infirmity peculiar to the
art which Wagner inaugurated: for instance the
restlessness of its optics, which makes it necessary
to change one's attitude to it every second. They
understand nothing of Wagner who see in him
but a sport of nature, an arbitrary mood, a chapter
of accidents. He was not the <q>defective,</q> <q>ill-fated,</q>
<q>contradictory</q> genius that people have
declared him to be. Wagner was something <emph>complete</emph>,
he was a typical <hi rend='italic'>décadent</hi>, in whom every sign
of <q>free will</q> was lacking, in whom every feature
was necessary. If there is anything at all of
interest in Wagner, it is the consistency with
which a critical physiological condition may convert
itself, step by step, conclusion after conclusion,
into a method, a form of procedure, a reform of
all principles, a crisis in taste.
</p>

<p>
At this point I shall only stop to consider the
question of <emph>style</emph>. How is
<emph>decadence</emph> in <emph>literature</emph>
characterised? By the fact that in it life no longer
animates the whole. Words become predominant
and leap right out of the sentence to which they
belong, the sentences themselves trespass beyond
their bounds, and obscure the sense of the whole
page, and the page in its turn gains in vigour at
<pb n="020"/><anchor id="Pg020"/>
the cost of the whole,—the whole is no longer a
whole. But this is the formula for every decadent
style: there is always anarchy among the atoms,
disaggregation of the will,—in moral terms: <q>freedom
of the individual,</q>—extended into a political
theory <q><emph>equal</emph> rights for all.</q> Life, equal vitality,
all the vibration and exuberance of life, driven
back into the smallest structure, and the remainder
left almost lifeless. Everywhere paralysis, distress,
and numbness, or hostility and chaos both
striking one with ever increasing force the higher
the forms of organisation are into which one
ascends. The whole no longer lives at all: it
is composed, reckoned up, artificial, a fictitious
thing.
</p>

<p>
In Wagner's case the first thing we notice is an
hallucination, not of tones, but of attitudes. Only
after he has the latter does he begin to seek the
semiotics of tone for them. If we wish to
admire him, we should observe him at work
here: how he separates and distinguishes, how he
arrives at small unities, and how he galvanises
them, accentuates them, and brings them into pre-eminence.
But in this way he exhausts his strength
the rest is worthless. How paltry, awkward, and
amateurish is his manner of <q>developing,</q> his
attempt at combining incompatible parts. His
manner in this respect reminds one of two people
who even in other ways are not unlike him in style—the
brothers Goncourt; one almost feels compassion
for so much impotence. That Wagner
disguised his inability to create organic forms, under
the cloak of a principle, that he should have constructed
<pb n="021"/><anchor id="Pg021"/>
a <q>dramatic style</q> out of what we should
call the total inability to create any style whatsoever,
is quite in keeping with that daring habit,
which stuck to him throughout his life, of setting
up a principle wherever capacity failed him.
(In this respect he was very different from old
Kant, who rejoiced in another form of daring, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>:
whenever a principle failed him, he endowed man
with a <q>capacity</q> which took its place…) Once
more let it be said that Wagner is really only
worthy of admiration and love by virtue of his inventiveness
in small things, in his elaboration of
details,—here one is quite justified in proclaiming
him a master of the first rank, as our greatest
musical <emph>miniaturist</emph> who compresses an infinity of
meaning and sweetness into the smallest space.
His wealth of colour, of chiaroscuro, of the mystery
of a dying light, so pampers our senses that afterwards
almost every other musician strikes us as
being too robust. If people would believe me,
they would not form the highest idea of Wagner
from that which pleases them in him to-day. All
that was only devised for convincing the masses,
and people like ourselves recoil from it just as one
would recoil from too garish a fresco. What concern
have we with the irritating brutality of the overture
to the <q>Tannhauser</q>? Or with the Walkyrie
Circus? Whatever has become popular in
Wagner's art, including that which has become
so outside the theatre, is in bad taste and spoils
taste. The <q>Tannhauser</q> March seems to me to
savour of the Philistine; the overture to the
<q>Flying Dutchman</q> is much ado about nothing;
<pb n="022"/><anchor id="Pg022"/>
the prelude to <q>Lohengrin</q> was the first, only too
insidious, only too successful example of how one
can hypnotise with music (—I dislike all music
which aspires to nothing higher than to convince
the nerves). But apart from the Wagner who
paints frescoes and practises magnetism, there is
yet another Wagner who hoards small treasures:
our greatest melancholic in music, full of side
glances, loving speeches, and words of comfort, in
which no one ever forestalled him,—the tone-master
of melancholy and drowsy happiness.…
A lexicon of Wagner's most intimate phrases—a
host of short fragments of from five to fifteen bars
each, of music which <emph>nobody knows</emph>.… Wagner
had the virtue of <hi rend='italic'>décadents</hi>,—pity.…
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>8.</head>

<p>
—<q>Very good! But how can this <hi rend='italic'>décadent</hi> spoil
one's taste if perchance one is not a musician, if
perchance one is not oneself a <hi rend='italic'>décadent</hi>?</q>—Conversely!
How can one <emph>help</emph> it! <emph>Just</emph> you try it!—You
know not what Wagner is: quite a great
actor! Does a more profound, a more <emph>ponderous</emph>
influence exist on the stage? Just look at these
youthlets,—all benumbed, pale, breathless! They
are Wagnerites: they know nothing about music,—and
yet Wagner gets the mastery of them.
Wagner's art presses with the weight of a hundred
atmospheres: do but submit, there is nothing
else to do.… Wagner the actor is a tyrant, his
pathos flings all taste, all resistance, to the winds.
</p>

<pb n="023"/><anchor id="Pg023"/>

<p>
—Who else has this persuasive power in his attitudes,
who else sees attitudes so clearly before anything
else! This holding-of-its-breath in Wagnerian
pathos, this disinclination to have done with an
intense feeling, this terrifying habit of dwelling
on a situation in which every instant almost
chokes one.——
</p>

<p>
Was Wagner a musician at all? In any case he
was something else to <emph>a much greater degree</emph>—that
is to say, an incomparable <hi rend='italic'>histrio</hi>, the greatest
mime, the most astounding theatrical genius that
the Germans have ever had, our <emph>scenic artist par
excellence</emph>. He belongs to some other sphere than
the history of music, with whose really great and
genuine figure he must not be confounded. Wagner
<emph>and</emph> Beethoven—this is blasphemy—and above all
it does not do justice even to Wagner.… As a
musician he was no more than what he was as a
man, he <emph>became</emph> a musician, he <emph>became</emph>
a poet, because the tyrant in him, his actor's genius, drove
him to be both. Nothing is known concerning
Wagner, so long as his dominating instinct has
not been divined.
</p>

<p>
Wagner was <emph>not</emph> instinctively a musician. And
this he proved by the way in which he abandoned
all laws and rules, or, in more precise terms, all
style in music, in order to make what he wanted
with it, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, a rhetorical medium for the stage, a
medium of expression, a means of accentuating an
attitude, a vehicle of suggestion and of the psychologically
picturesque. In this department Wagner
may well stand as an inventor and an innovator
of the first order—<emph>he increased the powers of speech
<pb n="024"/><anchor id="Pg024"/>
of music to an incalculable degree</emph>—he is the Victor
Hugo of music as language, provided always we
allow that under certain circumstances music may
be something which is not music, but speech—instrument—<hi rend='italic'>ancilla
dramaturgica</hi>. Wagner's
music, <emph>not</emph> in the tender care of theatrical taste,
which is very tolerant, is simply bad music, perhaps
the worst that has ever been composed. When a
musician can no longer count up to three, he
becomes <q>dramatic,</q> he becomes <q>Wagnerian</q>.…
</p>

<p>
Wagner almost discovered the magic which can
be wrought even now by means of music which is
both incoherent and <emph>elementary</emph>. His consciousness
of this attains to huge proportions, as does also his
instinct to dispense entirely with higher law and
<emph>style</emph>. The elementary factors—sound, movement,
colour, in short, the whole sensuousness of music—suffice.
Wagner never calculates as a musician
with a musician's conscience, all he strains after is
effect, nothing more than effect. And he knows
what he has to make an effect upon!—In this he
is as unhesitating as Schiller was, as any theatrical
man must be; he has also the latter's contempt for
the world which he brings to its knees before him.
A man is an actor when he is ahead of mankind in
his possession of this one view, that everything
which has to strike people as true, must not be
true. This rule was formulated by Talma: it
contains the whole psychology of the actor, it also
contains—and this we need not doubt—all his
morality. Wagner's music is never true.
</p>

<p>
—But it is supposed to be so: and thus everything
is as it should be. As long as we are young, and
<pb n="025"/><anchor id="Pg025"/>
Wagnerites into the bargain, we regard Wagner as
rich, even as the model of a prodigal giver, even as
a great landlord in the realm of sound. We admire
him in very much the same way as young Frenchmen
admire Victor Hugo—that is to say, for his
<q>royal liberality.</q> Later on we admire the one as
well as the other for the opposite reason: as masters
and paragons in economy, as <emph>prudent</emph> amphitryons.
Nobody can equal them in the art of providing a
princely board with such a modest outlay.—The
Wagnerite, with his credulous stomach, is even
sated with the fare which his master conjures up
before him. But we others who, in books as in
music, desire above all to find <emph>substance</emph>, and who
are scarcely satisfied with the mere representation
of a banquet, are much worse off. In plain English,
Wagner does not give us enough to masticate.
His recitative—very little meat, more bones, and
plenty of broth—I christened <q><hi rend='italic'>alla genovese</hi></q>: I
had no intention of flattering the Genoese with this
remark, but rather the <hi rend='italic'>older recitativo</hi>, the
<hi rend='italic'>recitativo
secco</hi>. And as to Wagnerian <hi rend='italic'>leitmotif</hi>, I fear I lack
the necessary culinary understanding for it. If hard
pressed, I might say that I regard it perhaps as an
ideal toothpick, as an opportunity of ridding one's
self of what remains of one's meal. Wagner's
<q>arias</q> are still left over. But now I shall hold
my tongue.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>9.</head>

<p>
Even in his general sketch of the action, Wagner
is above all an actor. The first thing that occurs
to him is a scene which is certain to produce a
<pb n="026"/><anchor id="Pg026"/>
strong effect, a real <hi rend='italic'>actio</hi>,<note
place="foot"><hi rend='italic'>Note.</hi>—It was a real disaster for æsthetics when the
word drama got to be translated by <q>action.</q> Wagner is
not the only culprit here, the whole world does the same,—even
the philologists who ought to know better. What
ancient drama had in view was <emph>grand pathetic scenes</emph>,—it
even excluded action (or placed it <emph>before</emph>
the piece or <emph>behind</emph>
the scenes). The word drama is of Doric origin, and
according to the usage of the Dorian language it meant
<q>event,</q> <q>history,</q>—both words in a hieratic sense. The
oldest drama represented local legends, <q>sacred history,</q>
upon which the foundation of the cult rested (—thus it was
not <q>action,</q> but fatality. δρᾶν in Doric has nothing to do
with action).</note> with a basso-relievo of
attitudes; an <emph>overwhelming</emph> scene, this he now
proceeds to elaborate more deeply, and out of it
he draws his characters. The whole of what remains
to be done follows of itself, fully in keeping with a
technical economy which has no reason to be subtle.
It is not Corneille's public that Wagner has to consider,
it is merely the nineteenth century. Concerning
the <q>actual requirements of the stage</q>
Wagner would have about the same opinion as any
other actor of to-day, a series of powerful scenes,
each stronger than the one that preceded it,—and,
in between, all kinds of <emph>clever</emph> nonsense. His first
concern is to guarantee the effect of his work; he
begins with the third act, he <emph>approves</emph> his work
according to the quality of its final effect. Guided
by this sort of understanding of the stage, there is
not much danger of one's creating a drama unawares.
Drama demands <emph>inexorable</emph> logic: but what did
Wagner care about logic? Again I say, it was not
Corneille's public that he had to consider; but
<pb n="027"/><anchor id="Pg027"/>
merely Germans! Everybody knows the technical
difficulties before which the dramatist often has to
summon all his strength and frequently to sweat
his blood: the difficulty of making the <emph>plot</emph> seem
necessary and the unravelment as well, so that both
are conceivable only in a certain way, and so that
each may give the impression of freedom (the
principle of the smallest expenditure of energy).
Now the very last thing that Wagner does is to
sweat blood over the plot; and on this and the
unravelment he certainly spends the smallest
possible amount of energy. Let anybody put one
of Wagner's <q>plots</q> under the microscope, and I
wager that he will be forced to laugh. Nothing is
more enlivening than the dilemma in <q>Tristan,</q>
unless it be that in the <q>Mastersingers.</q> Wagner
is <emph>no</emph> dramatist; let nobody be deceived on this
point. All he did was to love the word <q>drama</q>—he
always loved fine words. Nevertheless, in his
writings the word <q>drama</q> is merely a misunderstanding
(—<emph>and</emph> a piece of shrewdness: Wagner
always affected superiority in regard to the word
<q>opera</q>—), just as the word <q>spirit</q> is a misunderstanding
in the New Testament.—He was
not enough of a psychologist for drama; he instinctively
avoided a psychological plot—but how?—by
always putting idiosyncrasy in its place.…
Very modern—eh? Very Parisian! very decadent!…
Incidentally, the <emph>plots</emph> that Wagner knows
how to unravel with the help of dramatic inventions,
are of quite another kind. For example, let
us suppose that Wagner requires a female voice.
A whole act without a woman's voice would be
<pb n="028"/><anchor id="Pg028"/>
impossible! But in this particular instance not
one of the heroines happens to be free. What
does Wagner do? He emancipates the oldest
woman on earth, Erda. <q>Step up, aged grandmamma!
You have got to sing!</q> And Erda
sings. Wagner's end has been achieved. Thereupon
he immediately dismisses the old lady. <q>Why
on earth did you come? Off with you! Kindly go
to sleep again!</q> In short, a scene full of mythological
awe, before which the Wagnerite <emph>wonders</emph>
all kinds of things.…
</p>

<p>
—<q>But the substance of Wagner's texts! their
mythical substance, their eternal substance</q>—Question:
how is this substance, this eternal
substance tested? The chemical analyst replies:
Translate Wagner into the real, into the modern,—let
us be even more cruel, and say into the
bourgeois! And what will then become of him?—Between
ourselves, I have tried the experiment.
Nothing is more entertaining, nothing more worthy
of being recommended to a picnic-party, than to
discuss Wagner dressed in a more modern garb:
for instance Parsifal, as a candidate in divinity,
with a public-school education (—the latter, quite
indispensable <emph>for pure</emph>
foolishness). What <emph>surprises</emph>
await one! Would you believe it, that Wagner's
heroines one and all, once they have been divested
of the heroic husks, are almost indistinguishable
from Mdme. Bovary!—just as one can conceive
conversely, of Flaubert's being <emph>well able</emph> to transform
all his heroines into Scandinavian or Carthaginian
women, and then to offer them to Wagner in this
mythologised form as a libretto. Indeed, generally
<pb n="029"/><anchor id="Pg029"/>
speaking, Wagner does not seem to have become
interested in any other problems than those which
engross the little Parisian decadents of to-day.
Always five paces away from the hospital! All
very modern problems, all problems which are at
home <emph>in big cities!</emph> do not doubt it!… Have
you noticed (it is in keeping with this association
of ideas) that Wagner's heroines never have any
children?—They <emph>cannot</emph> have them.… The despair
with which Wagner tackled the problem of arranging
in some way for Siegfried's birth, betrays how
modern his feelings on this point actually were.—Siegfried
<q>emancipated woman</q>—but not with
any hope of offspring.—And now here is a fact
which leaves us speechless: Parsifal is Lohengrin's
father! How ever did he do it?—Ought one at
this juncture to remember that <q>chastity works
miracles</q>?…
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Wagnerus dixit princeps in castitate auctoritas.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>10.</head>

<p>
And now just a word <hi rend='italic'>en passant</hi> concerning
Wagner's writings: they are among other things
a school of <emph>shrewdness</emph>. The system of procedures
of which Wagner disposes, might be applied to a
hundred other cases,—he that hath ears to hear
let him hear. Perhaps I may lay claim to some
public acknowledgment, if I put three of the most
valuable of these procedures into a precise form.
</p>

<p>
Everything that Wagner <emph>cannot</emph> do is bad.
</p>

<p>
Wagner could do much more than he does;
but his strong principles prevent him.
</p>

<p>
Everything that Wagner <emph>can</emph> do, no one will
<pb n="030"/><anchor id="Pg030"/>
ever be able to do after him, no one has ever
done before him, and no one must ever do after
him. Wagner is godly.
</p>

<p>
These three propositions are the quintessence
of Wagner's writings;—the rest is merely—<q>literature</q>.
</p>

<p>
—Not every kind of music hitherto has been in
need of literature; and it were well, to try and
discover the actual reason of this. Is it perhaps
that Wagner's music is too difficult to understand?
Or did he fear precisely the reverse—that it was
too easy,—that people might <emph>not understand it with
sufficient difficulty</emph>?—As a matter of fact, his whole
life long, he did nothing but repeat one proposition:
that his music did not mean music alone!
But something more! Something immeasurably more!…
<q><emph>Not music alone</emph></q>—<emph>no</emph> musician would
speak in this way. I repeat, Wagner could not
create things as a whole; he had no choice, he
was obliged to create things in bits, with <q>motives,</q>
attitudes, formulæ, duplications, and hundreds of
repetitions, he remained a rhetorician in music,—and
that is why he was at bottom <emph>forced</emph> to press
<q>this means</q> into the foreground. <q>Music can
never be anything else than a means</q>: this was
his theory, but above all it was the only <emph>practice</emph>
that lay open to him. No musician however thinks
in this way.—Wagner was in need of literature, in
order to persuade the whole world to take his
music seriously, profoundly, <q>because it <emph>meant</emph> an
infinity of things</q>, all his life he was the commentator
of the <q>Idea.</q>—What does Elsa stand
for? But without a doubt, Elsa is <q>the unconscious
<pb n="031"/><anchor id="Pg031"/>
<emph>mind of the people</emph></q> (—<q>when I realised this, I
naturally became a thorough revolutionist</q>—).
</p>

<p>
Do not let us forget that, when Hegel and
Schelling were misleading the minds of Germany,
Wagner was still young: that he guessed, or rather
fully grasped, that the only thing which Germans
take seriously is—<q>the idea,</q>—that is to say, something
obscure, uncertain, wonderful; that among
Germans lucidity is an objection, logic a refutation.
Schopenhauer rigorously pointed out the dishonesty
of Hegel's and Schelling's age,—rigorously, but also
unjustly, for he himself, the pessimistic old counterfeiter,
was in no way more <q>honest</q> than his more
famous contemporaries. But let us leave morality
out of the question, Hegel is a <emph>matter of taste</emph>.…
And not only of German but of European taste!…
A taste which Wagner understood!—which
he felt equal to! which he has immortalised!—All
he did was to apply it to music—he invented a
style for himself, which might mean an <q>infinity
of things,</q>—he was <emph>Hegel's</emph> heir.… Music as
<q>Idea.</q>—
</p>

<p>
And how well Wagner was understood!—The
same kind of man who used to gush over Hegel,
now gushes over Wagner, in his school they even
<emph>write</emph> Hegelian.<note place="foot">Hegel and his school
wrote notoriously obscure German.—<hi rend='italic'>Tr.</hi></note>
But he who understood Wagner
best, was the German youthlet. The two words
<q>infinity</q> and <q>meaning</q> were sufficient for this:
at their sound the youthlet immediately began to
feel exceptionally happy. Wagner did <emph>not</emph> conquer
these boys with music, but with the <q>idea</q>:—it is
<pb n="032"/><anchor id="Pg032"/>
the enigmatical vagueness of his art, its game of
hide-and-seek amid a hundred symbols, its polychromy
in ideals, which leads and lures the lads.
It is Wagner's genius for forming clouds, his
sweeps and swoops through the air, his ubiquity and
nullibiety—precisely the same qualities with which
Hegel led and lured in his time!—Moreover in
the presence of Wagner's multifariousness, plenitude
and arbitrariness, they seem to themselves
justified—<q>saved</q>. Tremulously they listen while
the <emph>great symbols</emph> in his art seem to make themselves
heard from out the misty distance, with a
gentle roll of thunder, and they are not at all displeased
if at times it gets a little grey, gruesome
and cold. Are they not one and all, like Wagner
himself, on <emph>quite intimate terms</emph> with bad weather,
with German weather! Wotan is their God, but
Wotan is the God of bad weather.… They are
right, how could these German youths—in their
present condition,—miss what we others, we
<hi rend='italic'>halcyonians</hi>, miss in Wagner? <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>:
<hi rend='italic'>la gaya scienza</hi>;
light feet, wit, fire, grave, grand logic, stellar dancing,
wanton intellectuality, the vibrating light of
the South, the calm sea—perfection.…
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>11.</head>

<p>
—I have mentioned the sphere to which Wagner
belongs—certainly not to the history of music.
What, however, does he mean historically?—<emph>The
rise of the actor in music</emph>: a momentous event
which not only leads me to think but also to fear.
</p>

<p>
In a word: <q>Wagner and Liszt.</q> Never yet
<pb n="033"/><anchor id="Pg033"/>
have the <q>uprightness</q> and <q>genuineness</q> of
musicians been put to such a dangerous test. It is
glaringly obvious: great success, mob success is
no longer the achievement of the genuine,—in order
to get it a man must be an actor!—Victor Hugo
and Richard Wagner—they both prove one and
the same thing: that in declining civilisations,
wherever the mob is allowed to decide, genuineness
becomes superfluous, prejudicial, unfavourable.
The actor, alone, can still kindle <emph>great</emph> enthusiasm.—And
thus it is his <emph>golden age</emph> which is now dawning,—his
and that of all those who are in any way
related to him. With drums and fifes, Wagner
marches at the head of all artists in declamation,
in display and virtuosity. He began by convincing
the conductors of orchestras, the scene-shifters and
stage-singers, not to forget the orchestra:—he
<q>delivered</q> them from monotony.… The movement
that Wagner created has spread even to the
land of knowledge: whole sciences pertaining to
music are rising slowly, out of centuries of
scholasticism. As an example of what I mean,
let me point more particularly to <emph>Riemann's</emph>
services to rhythmics; he was the first who called
attention to the leading idea in punctuation—even
for music (unfortunately he did so with a bad
word; he called it <q>phrasing</q>).—All these people,
and I say it with gratitude, are the best, the most
respectable among Wagner's admirers—they have
a perfect right to honour Wagner. The same
instinct unites them with one another; in him
they recognise their highest type, and since he
has inflamed them with his own ardour they feel
<pb n="034"/><anchor id="Pg034"/>
themselves transformed into power, even into great
power. In this quarter, if anywhere, Wagner's
influence has really been <emph>beneficent</emph>. Never before
has there been so much thinking, willing, and
industry in this sphere. Wagner endowed all
these artists with a new conscience: what they
now exact and <emph>obtain</emph> from themselves, they had
never exacted before Wagner's time—before then
they had been too modest. Another spirit prevails
on the stage since Wagner rules there the most
difficult things are expected, blame is severe, praise
very scarce,—the good and the excellent have
become the rule. Taste is no longer necessary,
nor even is a good voice. Wagner is sung only
with ruined voices: this has a more <q>dramatic</q>
effect. Even talent is out of the question. Expressiveness
at all costs, which is what the
Wagnerian ideal—the ideal of decadence—demands,
is hardly compatible with talent. All
that is required for this is virtue—that is to say,
training, automatism, <q>self-denial</q>. Neither taste,
voices, nor gifts, Wagner's stage requires but one
thing: <emph>Germans!</emph>… The definition of a German:
an obedient man with long legs.… There is a
deep significance in the fact that the rise of
Wagner should have coincided with the rise of the
<q>Empire</q>: both phenomena are a proof of one
and the same thing—obedience and long legs.—Never
have people been more obedient, never have
they been so well ordered about. The conductors
of Wagnerian orchestras, more particularly, are
worthy of an age, which posterity will one day
call, with timid awe, the <emph>classical age of war</emph>.
</p>

<pb n="035"/><anchor id="Pg035"/>

<p>
Wagner understood how to command; in this
respect, too, he was a great teacher. He commanded
as a man who had exercised an inexorable
will over himself—as one who had practised lifelong
discipline: Wagner was, perhaps, the greatest example
of self-violence in the whole of the history
of art (—even Alfieri, who in other respects is his
next-of-kin, is outdone by him. The note of a
Torinese).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>12.</head>

<p>
This view, that our actors have become more
worthy of respect than heretofore, does not imply
that I believe them to have become less dangerous.…
But who is in any doubt as to what I
want,—as to what the <emph>three requisitions</emph> are concerning
which my wrath and my care and love
of art, have made me open my mouth on this
occasion?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>That the stage should not become master of the arts.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>That the actor should not become the corrupter of
the genuine.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>That music should not become an art of lying.</hi>
</p>

<ab>
<hi rend='italic'>Friedrich Nietzsche.</hi>
</ab>

</div>

<pb n="036"/><anchor id="Pg036"/>

<div>
<head>Postscript</head>

<p>
The gravity of these last words allows me at
this point to introduce a few sentences out of an
unprinted essay which will at least leave no doubt
as to my earnestness in regard to this question.
The title of this essay is: <q>What Wagner has cost
us.</q>
</p>

<p>
One pays dearly for having been a follower of
Wagner. Even to-day a vague feeling that this
is so, still prevails. Even Wagner's success, his
triumph, did not uproot this feeling thoroughly.
But formerly it was strong, it was terrible, it was
a gloomy hate throughout almost three-quarters
of Wagner's life. The resistance which he met
with among us Germans cannot be too highly
valued or too highly honoured. People guarded
themselves against him as against an illness,—not
with arguments—it is impossible to refute an illness,—but
with obstruction, with mistrust, with
repugnance, with loathing, with sombre earnestness,
as though he were a great rampant danger. The
æsthetes gave themselves away when out of three
schools of German philosophy they waged an
absurd war against Wagner's principles with <q>ifs</q>
and <q>fors</q>—what did he care about principles,
even his own!—The Germans themselves had
enough instinctive good sense to dispense with
every <q>if</q> and <q>for</q> in this matter. An instinct
is weakened when it becomes conscious: for by
<pb n="037"/><anchor id="Pg037"/>
becoming conscious it makes itself feeble. If there
were any signs that in spite of the universal
character of European decadence there was still a
modicum of health, still an instinctive premonition
of what is harmful and dangerous, residing in the
German soul, then it would be precisely this blunt
resistance to Wagner which I should least like to
see underrated. It does us honour, it gives us some
reason to hope: France no longer has such an
amount of health at her disposal. The Germans,
these <emph>loiterers par excellence</emph>, as history shows, are
to-day the most backward among the civilised
nations of Europe; this has its advantages,—for
they are thus relatively the youngest.
</p>

<p>
One pays dearly for having been a follower of
Wagner. It is only quite recently that the Germans
have overcome a sort of dread of him,—the desire
to be rid of him occurred to them again and again.<note place="foot">Was Wagner
a German at all? There are reasons enough for putting this question.
It is difficult to find a single German trait in his character. Great learner that
he was, he naturally imitated a great deal that was German—but
that is all. His very soul contradicts everything which
hitherto has been regarded as German, not to mention
German musicians!—His father was an actor of the name
of Geyer.… That which has been popularised hitherto
as <q>Wagner's life</q> is <hi rend='italic'>fable convenue</hi> if not something worse.
I confess my doubts on any point which is vouched for by
Wagner alone. He was not proud enough to be able to
suffer the truth about himself. Nobody had less pride than
he. Like Victor Hugo he remained true to himself even
in his biography,—he remained an actor.</note>
Does anybody remember a very curious occurrence
in which, quite unexpectedly towards the end, this
<pb n="038"/><anchor id="Pg038"/>
old feeling once more manifested itself? It
happened at Wagner's funeral. The first Wagner
Society, the one in Munich, laid a wreath on his grave
with this inscription, which immediately became
famous: <q>Salvation to the Saviour!</q> Everybody
admired the lofty inspiration which had dictated
this inscription, as also the taste which seemed to
be the privilege of the followers of Wagner. Many
also, however (it was singular enough), made this
slight alteration in it: <q>Salvation <emph>from</emph> the Saviour</q>—People
began to breathe again—
</p>

<p>
One pays dearly for having been a follower of
Wagner. Let us try to estimate the influence
of this worship upon culture. Whom did this
movement press to the front? What did it make
ever more and more pre-eminent?—In the first
place the layman's arrogance, the arrogance of the
art-maniac. Now these people are organising
societies, they wish to make their taste prevail, they
even wish to pose as judges <hi rend='italic'>in rebus musicis et
musicantibus</hi>. Secondly: an ever increasing indifference
towards severe, noble and conscientious
schooling in the service of art, and in its place
the belief in genius, or in plain English, cheeky
dilettantism (—the formula for this is to be found
in the <hi rend='italic'>Mastersingers</hi>). Thirdly, and this is the
worst of all: <emph>Theatrocracy</emph>—, the craziness of a
belief in the pre-eminence of the theatre, in the
right of the theatre to rule supreme over the arts,
over Art in general.… But this should be
shouted into the face of Wagnerites a hundred
times over: that the theatre is something lower than
art, something secondary, something coarsened,
<pb n="039"/><anchor id="Pg039"/>
above all something suitably distorted and falsified
for the mob. In this respect Wagner altered
nothing: Bayreuth is grand Opera—and not even
good opera.… The stage is a form of Demolatry
in the realm of taste, the stage is an insurrection
of the mob, a <hi rend='italic'>plébiscite</hi> against good taste.…
The case of Wagner proves this fact: he captivated
the masses—he depraved taste, he even perverted
our taste for opera!—
</p>

<p>
One pays dearly for having been a follower of
Wagner. What has Wagner-worship made out
of spirit? Does Wagner liberate the spirit? To
him belong that ambiguity and equivocation and
all other qualities which can convince the uncertain
without making them conscious of why they have
been convinced. In this sense Wagner is a seducer
on a grand scale. There is nothing exhausted,
nothing effete, nothing dangerous to life, nothing
that slanders the world in the realm of spirit, which
has not secretly found shelter in his art, he conceals
the blackest obscurantism in the luminous
orbs of the ideal. He flatters every nihilistic
(Buddhistic) instinct and togs it out in music; he
flatters every form of Christianity, every religious
expression of decadence. He that hath ears to
hear let him hear: everything that has ever grown
out of the soil of impoverished life, the whole
counterfeit coinage of the transcendental and of
a Beyond found its most sublime advocate in
Wagner's art, not in formulæ (Wagner is too
clever to use formulæ), but in the persuasion of the
senses which in their turn makes the spirit weary
and morbid. Music in the form of Circe … in
<pb n="040"/><anchor id="Pg040"/>
this respect his last work is his greatest masterpiece.
In the art of seduction <q>Parsifal</q> will for
ever maintain its rank as a stroke of genius.… I
admire this work. I would fain have composed it
myself. Wagner was never better inspired than
towards the end. The subtlety with which beauty
and disease are united here, reaches such a height,
that it casts so to speak a shadow upon all
Wagner's earlier achievements: it seems too bright,
too healthy. Do ye understand this? Health and
brightness acting like a shadow? Almost like an
objection?… To this extent are we already pure
fools.… Never was there a greater Master in
heavy hieratic perfumes—Never on earth has there
been such a connoisseur of paltry infinities, of all
that thrills, of extravagant excesses, of all the
feminism from out the vocabulary of happiness!
My friends, do but drink the philtres of this art!
Nowhere will ye find a more pleasant method of
enervating your spirit, of forgetting your manliness
in the shade of a rosebush.… Ah, this old
magician, mightiest of Klingsors; how he wages
war against us with his art, against us free spirits!
How he appeals to every form of cowardice of the
modern soul with his charming girlish notes!
There never was such a <emph>mortal hatred</emph> of knowledge!
One must be a very cynic in order to resist
seduction here. One must be able to bite in order
to resist worshipping at this shrine. Very well, old
seducer! The cynic cautions you—<hi rend='italic'>cave canem</hi>.…
</p>

<p>
One pays dearly for having been a follower of
Wagner. I contemplate the youthlets who have
long been exposed to his infection. The first
<pb n="041"/><anchor id="Pg041"/>
relatively innocuous effect of it is the corruption of
their taste. Wagner acts like chronic recourse to
the bottle. He stultifies, he befouls the stomach.
His specific effect: degeneration of the feeling for
rhythm. What the Wagnerite calls rhythmical is
what I call, to use a Greek metaphor, <q>stirring
a swamp.</q> Much more dangerous than all this,
however, is the corruption of ideas. The youthlet
becomes a moon-calf, an <q>idealist</q>. He stands
above science, and in this respect he has reached
the master's heights. On the other hand, he
assumes the airs of a philosopher, he writes for
the <hi rend='italic'>Bayreuth Journal</hi>; he solves all problems in
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Master. But the most ghastly thing of all is the
deterioration of the nerves. Let any one wander
through a large city at night, in all directions he
will hear people doing violence to instruments
with solemn rage and fury, a wild uproar breaks
out at intervals. What is happening? It is the
disciples of Wagner in the act of worshipping
him.… Bayreuth is another word for a Hydro.
A typical telegram from Bayreuth would read
<hi rend='italic'>bereits bereut</hi> (I already repent). Wagner is bad
for young men; he is fatal for women. What
medically speaking is a female Wagnerite? It
seems to me that a doctor could not be too serious
in putting this alternative of conscience to young
women; either one thing or the other. But they
have already made their choice. You cannot
serve two Masters when one of these is Wagner.
Wagner redeemed woman; and in return woman
built Bayreuth for him. Every sacrifice, every
<pb n="042"/><anchor id="Pg042"/>
surrender: there was nothing that they were not
prepared to give him. Woman impoverishes herself
in favour of the Master, she becomes quite
touching, she stands naked before him. The
female Wagnerite, the most attractive equivocality
that exists to-day: she is the incarnation of
Wagner's cause: his cause triumphs with her as
its symbol.… Ah, this old robber! He robs our
young men: he even robs our women as well, and
drags them to his cell.… Ah, this old Minotaur!
What has he not already cost us? Every year
processions of the finest young men and maidens
are led into his labyrinth that he may swallow
them up, every year the whole of Europe cries out
<q>Away to Crete! Away to Crete!</q>.…
</p>

</div>

<pb n="043"/><anchor id="Pg043"/>

<div>
<head>Second Postscript</head>

<p>
It seems to me that my letter is open to some
misunderstanding. On certain faces I see the
expression of gratitude; I even hear modest but
merry laughter. I prefer to be understood here
as in other things. But since a certain animal,
<emph>the worm</emph> of Empire,
the famous <hi rend='italic'>Rhinoxera</hi>, has
become lodged in the vineyards of the German
spirit, nobody any longer understands a word I
say. The <hi rend='italic'>Kreus-Zeitung</hi> has brought this home
to me, not to speak of the <hi rend='italic'>Litterarisches Centralblatt</hi>.
I have given the Germans the deepest
books that they have ever possessed—a sufficient
reason for their not having understood a word of
them.… If in this essay I declare war against
Wagner—and incidentally against a certain form
of German taste, if I seem to use strong language
about the cretinism of Bayreuth, it must not be
supposed that I am in the least anxious to glorify
any other musician. Other musicians are not to
be considered by the side of Wagner. Things are
generally bad. Decay is universal. Disease lies
at the very root of things. If Wagner's name
represents the ruin of music, just as Bernini's
stands for the ruin of sculpture, he is not on that
account its cause. All he did was to accelerate
the fall,—though we are quite prepared to admit
that he did it in a way which makes one recoil
with horror from this almost instantaneous decline
<pb n="044"/><anchor id="Pg044"/>
and fall to the depths. He possessed the ingenuousness
of decadence: this constituted his superiority.
He believed in it. He did not halt before
any of its logical consequences. The others hesitated—that
is their distinction. They have no
other. What is common to both Wagner and
<q>the others</q> consists in this: the decline of all
organising power, the abuse of traditional means,
without the capacity or the aim that would justify
this. The counterfeit imitation of grand forms,
for which nobody nowadays is strong, proud, self-reliant
and healthy enough, excessive vitality in
small details; passion at all costs; refinement as
an expression of impoverished life, ever more nerves
in the place of muscle. I know only one musician
who to-day would be able to compose an overture
as an organic whole: and nobody else knows him.<note place="foot">This undoubtedly
refers to Nietzsche's only disciple and
friend, Peter Gast—<hi rend='italic'>Tr.</hi></note>
He who is famous now, does not write better
music than Wagner, but only less characteristic, less
definite music:—less definite, because half measures,
even in decadence, cannot stand by the side of completeness.
But Wagner was complete, Wagner represented
thorough corruption, Wagner has had the
courage, the will, and the conviction for corruption.
What does Johannes Brahms matter?… It was
his good fortune to be misunderstood by Germany;
he was taken to be an antagonist of Wagner—people
required an antagonist!—But he did not
write necessary music, above all he wrote too
much music!—When one is not rich one should
<pb n="045"/><anchor id="Pg045"/>
at least have enough pride to be poor!… The
sympathy which here and there was meted out to
Brahms, apart from party interests and party misunderstandings,
was for a long time a riddle to
me, until one day through an accident, almost, I
discovered that he affected a particular type of
man. He has the melancholy of impotence. His
creations are not the result of plenitude, he thirsts
after abundance. Apart from what he plagiarises,
from what he borrows from ancient or exotically
modern styles—he is a master in the art of copying,—there
remains as his most individual quality
a <emph>longing</emph>.… And this is what the dissatisfied
of all kinds, and all those who yearn, divine in
him. He is much too little of a personality, too
little of a central figure.… The <q>impersonal,</q>
those who are not self-centred, love him for this.
He is especially the musician of a species of dissatisfied
women. Fifty steps further on, and we
find the female Wagnerite—just as we find Wagner
himself fifty paces ahead of Brahms.—The female
Wagnerite is a more definite, a more interesting,
and above all, a more attractive type. Brahms is
touching so long as he dreams or mourns over
himself in private—in this respect he is modern;—he
becomes cold, we no longer feel at one with
him when he poses as the child of the classics.…
People like to call Brahms Beethoven's heir:
I know of no more cautious euphemism—All
that which to-day makes a claim to being the
grand style in music is on precisely that account
either false to us or false to itself. This alternative
is suspicious enough: in itself it contains a
<pb n="046"/><anchor id="Pg046"/>
casuistic question concerning the value of the two
cases. The instinct of the majority protests
against the alternative; <q>false to us</q>—they do
not wish to be cheated;—and I myself would
certainly always prefer this type to the other
(<q>False to itself</q>). This is <emph>my</emph> taste.—Expressed
more clearly for the sake of the <q>poor in spirit</q>
it amounts to this: Brahms <emph>or</emph> Wagner.…
Brahms is <emph>not</emph> an actor.—A very great part of
other musicians may be summed up in the concept
Brahms—I do not wish to say anything about the
clever apes of Wagner, as for instance Goldmark:
when one has <q>The Queen of Sheba</q> to one's
name, one belongs to a menagerie,—one ought
to put oneself on show.—Nowadays all things that
can be done well and even with a master hand
are small. In this department alone is honesty
still possible. Nothing, however, can cure music
as a whole of its chief fault, of its fate, which is to
be the expression of general physiological contradiction,—which
is, in fact, to be modern.
</p>

<p>
The best instruction, the most conscientious
schooling, the most thorough familiarity, yea, and
even isolation, with the Old Masters,—all this only
acts as a palliative, or, more strictly speaking, has
but an illusory effect, because the first condition
of the right thing is no longer in our bodies;
whether this first condition be the strong race of
a Handel or the overflowing animal spirits of a
Rossini. Not everyone has the right to every
teacher: and this holds good of whole epochs.—In
itself it is not impossible that there are still remains
of stronger natures, typical unadapted men, somewhere
<pb n="047"/><anchor id="Pg047"/>
in Europe: from this quarter the advent of
a somewhat belated form of beauty and perfection,
even in music, might still be hoped for. But the
most that we can expect to see are exceptional
cases. From the rule, that corruption is paramount,
that corruption is a fatality,—not even a God can
save music.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="048"/><anchor id="Pg048"/>

<div>
<head>Epilogue</head>

<p>
And now let us take breath and withdraw a
moment from this narrow world which necessarily
must be narrow, because we have to make enquiries
relative to the value of <emph>persons</emph>. A philosopher
feels that he wants to wash his hands after he has
concerned himself so long with the <q>Case of
Wagner</q>. I shall now give my notion of what is
<emph>modern</emph>. According to the measure of energy of
every age, there is also a standard that determines
which virtues shall be allowed and which forbidden.
The age either has the virtues of <emph>ascending</emph> life, in
which case it resists the virtues of degeneration
with all its deepest instincts. Or it is in itself an
age of degeneration, in which case it requires the
virtues of declining life,—in which case it hates
everything that justifies itself, solely as being the
outcome of a plenitude, or a superabundance of
strength. Æsthetic is inextricably bound up with
these biological principles: there is decadent
æsthetic, and <emph>classical</emph> æsthetic,—<q>beauty in
itself</q> is just as much a chimera as any other
kind of idealism.—Within the narrow sphere of
the so-called moral values, no greater antithesis
could be found than that of <emph>master-morality</emph> and
the morality of <emph>Christian</emph> valuations: the latter
having grown out of a thoroughly morbid soil.
(—The gospels present us with the same physiological
types, as do the novels of Dostoiewsky),
<pb n="049"/><anchor id="Pg049"/>
the master-morality (<q>Roman,</q> <q>pagan,</q> <q>classical,</q>
<q>Renaissance</q>), on the other hand, being the symbolic
speech of well-constitutedness, of <emph>ascending</emph>
life, and of the Will to Power as a vital principle.
Master-morality <emph>affirms</emph> just as instinctively as
Christian morality <emph>denies</emph> (<q>God,</q> <q>Beyond,</q>
<q>self-denial,</q>—all of them negations). The first reflects
its plenitude upon things,—it transfigures, it embellishes,
it <emph>rationalises</emph> the world,—the latter impoverishes,
bleaches, mars the value of things; it
<emph>suppresses</emph> the world. <q>World</q> is a Christian term
of abuse. These antithetical forms in the optics
of values, are <emph>both</emph> necessary: they are different
points of view which cannot be circumvented either
with arguments or counter-arguments. One cannot
refute Christianity: it is impossible to refute
a diseased eyesight. That people should have
combated pessimism as if it had been a philosophy,
was the very acme of learned stupidity.
The concepts <q>true</q> and <q>untrue</q> do not seem to
me to have any sense in optics.—That, alone, which
has to be guarded against is the falsity, the instinctive
duplicity which <emph>would fain</emph> regard this antithesis
as no antithesis at all: just as Wagner did,—and
his mastery in this kind of falseness was of
no mean order. To cast side-long glances at
master-morality, at <emph>noble</emph> morality (—Icelandic
saga is perhaps the greatest documentary evidence
of these values), and at the same time to have the
opposite teaching, the <q>gospel of the lowly,</q> the
doctrine of the <emph>need</emph> of salvation, on one's lips!…
Incidentally, I admire the modesty of Christians
who go to Bayreuth. As for myself, I could <emph>not</emph>
<pb n="050"/><anchor id="Pg050"/>
endure to hear the sound of certain words on
Wagner's lips. There are some concepts which
are too good for Bayreuth … What? Christianity
adjusted for female Wagnerites, perhaps <emph>by</emph> female
Wagnerites—for, in his latter days Wagner was
thoroughly <hi rend='italic'>feminini generis</hi>—? Again I say, the
Christians of to-day are too modest for me.…
If Wagner were a Christian, then Liszt was perhaps
a Father of the Church!—The need of <emph>salvation</emph>,
the quintessence of all Christian needs, has nothing
in common with such clowns; it is the most
straightforward expression of decadence, it is the
most convincing and most painful affirmation of
decadence, in sublime symbols and practices. The
Christian wishes <emph>to be rid</emph> of himself.
<hi rend='italic'>Le moi est
toujours haissable.</hi> Noble morality, master-morality,
on the other hand, is rooted in a triumphant saying
of yea to <emph>one's self</emph>,—it is the self-affirmation and
self-glorification of life; it also requires sublime
symbols and practices; but only <q>because its heart
is too full.</q> The whole of beautiful art and of
great art belongs here; their common essence is
gratitude. But we must allow it a certain instinctive
repugnance <hi rend='italic'>to décadents</hi>, and a scorn and horror
of the latter's symbolism: such things almost prove
it. The noble Romans considered Christianity as
a <hi rend='italic'>fœda superstitio</hi>: let me call to your minds the
feelings which the last German of noble taste—Goethe—had
in regard to the cross. It is idle
to look for more valuable, more <emph>necessary</emph> contrasts.<note
place="foot">My <q>Genealogy of Morals</q> contains the best exposition
of the antithesis <q><emph>noble morality</emph></q> and
<q><emph>Christian morality</emph></q>;
a more decisive turning point in the history of
religious and moral science does not perhaps exist. This
book, which is a touchstone by which I can discover who are
my peers, rejoices in being accessible only to the most
elevated and most severe minds: the others have not the
ears to hear me. One must have one's passion in things,
<emph>wherein</emph> no one has passion nowadays.</note>
</p>

<pb n="051"/><anchor id="Pg051"/>

<p>
But the kind of falsity which is characteristic
of the Bayreuthians is not exceptional to-day.
We all know the hybrid concept of the Christian
gentleman. This <emph>innocence</emph> in contradiction, this
<q>clean conscience</q> in falsehood, is rather modern
<hi rend='italic'>par excellence</hi>, with it modernity is almost defined.
Biologically, modern man represents a <emph>contradiction
of values</emph>, he sits between two stools, he says yea
and nay in one breath. No wonder that it is
precisely in our age that falseness itself became
flesh and blood, and even genius! No wonder
<emph>Wagner</emph> dwelt amongst us! It was not without
reason that I called Wagner the Cagliostro of
modernity.… But all of us, though we do not
know it, involuntarily have values, words, formulæ,
and morals in our bodies, which are quite <emph>antagonistic</emph>
in their origin—regarded from a physiological
standpoint, we are <emph>false</emph>.… How would
a <emph>diagnosis of the modern soul</emph> begin? With a determined
incision into this agglomeration of contradictory
instincts, with the total suppression of its
antagonistic values, with vivisection applied to its
most <emph>instructive</emph> case. To philosophers the <q>Case
of Wagner</q> is a <emph>windfall</emph>—this essay, as you
observe, was inspired by gratitude.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="055"/><anchor id="Pg055"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Nietzsche <hi rend='italic'>contra</hi> Wagner</head>

<p>
THE BRIEF OF A PSYCHOLOGIST
</p>

<pb n="056"/><anchor id="Pg056"/>

<div>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
The following chapters have been selected from
past works of mine, and not without care. Some
of them date back as far as 1877. Here and there,
of course, they will be found to have been made a
little more intelligible, but above all, more brief.
Read consecutively, they can leave no one in any
doubt, either concerning myself, or concerning
Wagner: we are antipodes. The reader will come
to other conclusions, too, in his perusal of these
pages: for instance, that this is an essay for
psychologists and <emph>not</emph> for Germans.… I have
my readers everywhere, in Vienna, St Petersburg,
Copenhagen, Stockholm, Paris, and New York—but
<emph>I have none</emph> in Europe's Flat-land—Germany.…
And I might even have something to say to
Italians whom I love just as much as I …
<hi rend='italic'>Quousque tandem, Crispi</hi> … Triple alliance: a
people can only conclude a <hi rend='italic'>mésalliance</hi> with the
<q>Empire.</q>…
</p>

<p>
Friedrich Nietzsche.
</p>

<p>
Turin, <hi rend='italic'>Christmas 1888</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="057"/><anchor id="Pg057"/>

<div>
<head>Wherein I Admire Wagner.</head>

<p>
I believe that artists very often do not know
what they are best able to do. They are much
too vain. Their minds are directed to something
prouder than merely to appear like little plants,
which, with freshness, rareness, and beauty, know
how to sprout from their soil with real perfection.
The ultimate goodness of their own garden and
vineyard is superciliously under-estimated by
them, and their love and their insight are not
of the same quality. Here is a musician who is
a greater master than anyone else in the discovering
of tones, peculiar to suffering, oppressed,
and tormented souls, who can endow even dumb
misery with speech. Nobody can approach him
in the colours of late autumn, in the indescribably
touching joy of a last, a very last, and all too short
gladness; he knows of a chord which expresses
those secret and weird midnight hours of the soul,
when cause and effect seem to have fallen asunder,
and at every moment something may spring out
of nonentity. He is happiest of all when creating
from out the nethermost depths of human happiness,
<pb n="058"/><anchor id="Pg058"/>
and, so to speak, from out man's empty
bumper, in which the bitterest and most repulsive
drops have mingled with the sweetest for good or
evil at last. He knows that weary shuffling along
of the soul which is no longer able either to spring
or to fly, nay, which is no longer able to walk, he
has the modest glance of concealed suffering, of
understanding without comfort, of leave-taking
without word or sign; verily as the Orpheus of
all secret misery he is greater than anyone, and
many a thing was introduced into art for the first
time by him, which hitherto had not been given
expression, had not even been thought worthy of
art—the cynical revolts, for instance, of which only
the greatest sufferer is capable, also many a small
and quite microscopical feature of the soul, as it
were the scales of its amphibious nature—yes
indeed, he is the master of everything very small.
But this he refuses to be! His tastes are much
more in love with vast walls and with daring
frescoes!… He does not see that his spirit
has another desire and bent—a totally different
outlook—that it prefers to squat peacefully in the
corners of broken-down houses: concealed in this
way, and hidden even from himself, he paints his
really great masterpieces, all of which are very
short, often only one bar in length—there, only,
does he become quite good, great and perfect,
perhaps there alone.—Wagner is one who has
suffered much—and this elevates him above other
musicians.—I admire Wagner wherever he sets
<emph>himself</emph> to music—
</p>

</div>

<pb n="059"/><anchor id="Pg059"/>

<div>
<head>Wherein I Raise Objections.</head>

<p>
With all this I do not wish to imply that I
regard this music as healthy, and least of all in
those places where it speaks of Wagner himself.
My objections to Wagner's music are physiological
objections. Why should I therefore begin by
clothing them in æsthetic formulæ? Æsthetic is
indeed nothing more than applied physiology—The
fact I bring forward, my <q><hi rend='italic'>petit fait vrai</hi>,</q> is
that I can no longer breathe with ease when this
music begins to have its effect upon me; that my
foot immediately begins to feel indignant at it and
rebels: for what it needs is time, dance, march;
even the young German Kaiser could not march to
Wagner's Imperial March,—what my foot demands
in the first place from music is that ecstasy which
lies in good walking, stepping and dancing. But
do not my stomach, my heart, my circulation also
protest? Are not my intestines also troubled? And
do I not become hoarse unawares? … in order to
listen to Wagner I require Géraudel's Pastilles.…
And then I ask myself, what is it that my whole
body must have from music in general? for there
is no such thing as a soul.… I believe it must
have relief: as if all animal functions were accelerated
by means of light, bold, unfettered, self-reliant
rhythms, as if brazen and leaden life could lose its
weight by means of delicate and smooth melodies.
My melancholy would fain rest its head in the
haunts and abysses of perfection; for this reason
I need music. But Wagner makes one ill—What
do I care about the theatre? What do I care
<pb n="060"/><anchor id="Pg060"/>
about the spasms of its moral ecstasies in which
the mob—and who is not the mob to-day?—rejoices?
What do I care about the whole pantomimic
hocus-pocus of the actor? You are beginning
to see that I am essentially anti-theatrical at heart.
For the stage, this mob art <hi rend='italic'>par excellence</hi>, my soul
has that deepest scorn felt by every artist to-day.
With a stage success a man sinks to such an extent
in my esteem as to drop out of sight; failure in
this quarter makes me prick my ears, makes me
begin to pay attention. But this was not so with
Wagner, next to the Wagner who created the
most unique music that has ever existed there was
the Wagner who was essentially a man of the stage,
an actor, the most enthusiastic mimomaniac that
has perhaps existed on earth, even as a musician.
And let it be said <hi rend='italic'>en passant</hi> that if Wagner's
theory was <q>drama is the object, music is only a
means</q>—his practice was from beginning to end
<q>the attitude is the end, drama and even music can
never be anything else than means.</q> Music as
the manner of accentuating, of strengthening, and
deepening dramatic poses and all things which
please the senses of the actor; and Wagnerian
drama only an opportunity for a host of interesting
attitudes!—Alongside of all other instincts he had
the dictatorial instinct of a great actor in everything
and, as I have already said, as a musician also.—On
one occasion, and not without trouble, I made this
clear to a Wagnerite <hi rend='italic'>pur sang</hi>,—clearness and a
Wagnerite! I won't say another word. There
were reasons for adding; <q>For heaven's sake, be a
little more true unto yourself! We are not in
<pb n="061"/><anchor id="Pg061"/>
Bayreuth now. In Bayreuth people are only
upright in the mass; the individual lies, he even
lies to himself. One leaves oneself at home when
one goes to Bayreuth, one gives up all right to
one's own tongue and choice, to one's own taste and
even to one's own courage, one knows these things
no longer as one is wont to have them and practise
them before God and the world and between one's
own four walls. In the theatre no one brings the
finest senses of his art with him, and least of all
the artist who works for the theatre,—for here
loneliness is lacking; everything perfect does not
suffer a witness.… In the theatre one becomes
mob, herd, woman, Pharisee, electing cattle, patron,
idiot—Wagnerite: there, the most personal conscience
is bound to submit to the levelling charm
of the great multitude, there the neighbour rules,
there one <emph>becomes</emph> a neighbour.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Wagner As A Danger.</head>

<div>
<head>1.</head>

<p>
The aim after which more modern music is
striving, which is now given the strong but obscure
name of <q>unending melody,</q> can be clearly understood
by comparing it to one's feelings on entering
the sea. Gradually one loses one's footing and one
ultimately abandons oneself to the mercy or fury
of the elements: one has to swim. In the solemn,
or fiery, swinging movement, first slow and then
quick, of old music—one had to do something quite
different; one had to dance. The measure which
was required for this and the control of certain
<pb n="062"/><anchor id="Pg062"/>
balanced degrees of time and energy, forced the
soul of the listener to continual sobriety of thought.—Upon
the counterplay of the cooler currents of
air which came from this sobriety, and from the
warmer breath of enthusiasm, the charm of all
good music rested—Richard Wagner wanted
another kind of movement,—he overthrew the
physiological first principle of all music before his
time. It was no longer a matter of walking or
dancing,—we must swim, we must hover.… This
perhaps decides the whole matter. <q>Unending
melody</q> really wants to break all the symmetry
of time and strength; it actually scorns these
things—Its wealth of invention resides precisely in
what to an older ear sounds like rhythmic paradox
and abuse. From the imitation or the prevalence
of such a taste there would arise a danger for
music—so great that we can imagine none greater—the
complete degeneration of the feeling for
rhythm, <emph>chaos</emph> in the place of rhythm.… The
danger reaches its climax when such music cleaves
ever more closely to naturalistic play-acting and
pantomime, which governed by no laws of form,
aim at effect and nothing more.… Expressiveness
at all costs and music a servant, a slave to
attitudes—this is the end.…
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2.</head>

<p>
What? would it really be the first virtue of a
performance (as performing musical artists now
seem to believe), under all circumstances to attain
to a <hi rend='italic'>haut-relief</hi> which cannot be surpassed? If
this were applied to Mozart, for instance, would
<pb n="063"/><anchor id="Pg063"/>
it not be a real sin against Mozart's spirit,—Mozart's
cheerful, enthusiastic, delightful and loving
spirit? He who fortunately was no German, and
whose seriousness is a charming and golden seriousness
and not by any means that of a German
clodhopper.… Not to speak of the earnestness
of the <q>marble statue</q>.… But you seem to think
that all music is the music of the <q>marble statue</q>?—that
all music should, so to speak, spring out of
the wall and shake the listener to his very bowels?…
Only thus could music have any effect! But
on whom would the effect be made? Upon something
on which a noble artist ought never to deign
to act,—upon the mob, upon the immature! upon
the blasés! upon the diseased! upon idiots! upon
<emph>Wagnerites</emph>!…
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>A Music Without A Future.</head>

<p>
Of all the arts which succeed in growing on the
soil of a particular culture, music is the last plant
to appear; maybe because it is the one most
dependent upon our innermost feelings, and therefore
the last to come to the surface—at a time
when the culture to which it belongs is in its
autumn season and beginning to fade. It was only
in the art of the Dutch masters that the spirit of
mediæval Christianity found its expression—, its
architecture of sound is the youngest, but genuine
and legitimate, sister of the Gothic. It was only
in Handel's music that the best in Luther and
in those like him found its voice, the Judeo-heroic
trait which gave the Reformation a touch of greatness-the
<pb n="064"/><anchor id="Pg064"/>
Old Testament, <emph>not</emph> the New, become
music. It was left to Mozart, to pour out the epoch
of Louis XIV., and of the art of Racine and Claude
Lorrain, in <emph>ringing</emph> gold; only in Beethoven's and
Rossini's music did the Eighteenth Century sing
itself out—the century of enthusiasm, broken ideals,
and <emph>fleeting joy</emph>. All real and original music is a
swan song—Even our last form of music, despite
its prevalence and its will to prevail, has perhaps
only a short time to live, for it sprouted from a
soil which was in the throes of a rapid subsidence,—of
a culture which will soon be <emph>submerged</emph>. A
certain catholicism of feeling, and a predilection
for some ancient indigenous (so-called national)
ideals and eccentricities, was its first condition.
Wagner's appropriation of old sagas and songs,
in which scholarly prejudice taught us to see
something German <hi rend='italic'>par excellence</hi>—now we laugh
at it all, the resurrection of these Scandinavian
monsters with a thirst for ecstatic sensuality and
spiritualisation—the whole of this taking and
giving on Wagner's part, in the matter of subjects,
characters, passions, and nerves, would also give
unmistakable expression to the <emph>spirit of his music</emph>
provided that this music, like any other, did not
know how to speak about itself save ambiguously:
for <hi rend='italic'>musica is a woman</hi>.… We must not let ourselves
be misled concerning this state of things,
by the fact that at this very moment we are living
in a reaction, <emph>in the heart itself</emph> of a reaction. The
age of international wars, of ultramontane martyrdom,
in fact, the whole interlude-character which
typifies the present condition of Europe, may
<pb n="065"/><anchor id="Pg065"/>
indeed help an art like Wagner's to sudden glory,
without, however, in the least ensuring its <emph>future
prosperity</emph>. The Germans themselves have no
future.…
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>We Antipodes.</head>

<p>
Perhaps a few people, or at least my friends, will
remember that I made my first plunge into life
armed with some errors and some exaggerations,
but that, in any case, I began with <emph>hope</emph> in my
heart. In the philosophical pessimism of the nineteenth
century, I recognised—who knows by what
by-paths of personal experience—the symptom of
a higher power of thought, a more triumphant
plenitude of life, than had manifested itself hitherto
in the philosophies of Hume, Kant and Hegel!—I
regarded <emph>tragic</emph> knowledge as the most beautiful
luxury of our culture, as its most precious, most
noble, most dangerous kind of prodigality; but,
nevertheless, in view of its overflowing wealth, as
a justifiable <emph>luxury</emph>. In the same way, I began by
interpreting Wagner's music as the expression of a
Dionysian powerfulness of soul. In it I thought I
heard the earthquake by means of which a primeval
life-force, which had been constrained for ages, was
seeking at last to burst its bonds, quite indifferent
to how much of that which nowadays calls itself
culture, would thereby be shaken to ruins. You
see how I misinterpreted, you see also, what I
<emph>bestowed</emph> upon Wagner and Schopenhauer—myself.…
Every art and every philosophy may be
regarded either as a cure or as a stimulant to
<pb n="066"/><anchor id="Pg066"/>
ascending or declining life: they always presuppose
suffering and sufferers. But there are two kinds
of sufferers:—those that suffer from <emph>overflowing
vitality</emph>, who need Dionysian art and require a
tragic insight into, and a tragic outlook upon, the
phenomenon life,—and there are those who suffer
from <emph>reduced</emph> vitality, and who crave for repose,
quietness, calm seas, or else the intoxication, the
spasm, the bewilderment which art and philosophy
provide. Revenge upon life itself—this is the most
voluptuous form of intoxication for such indigent
souls!… Now Wagner responds quite as well
as Schopenhauer to the twofold cravings of these
people,—they both deny life, they both slander it
but precisely on this account they are my antipodes.—The
richest creature, brimming over with
vitality,—the Dionysian God and man, may not
only allow himself to gaze upon the horrible and
the questionable; but he can also lend his hand to
the terrible deed, and can indulge in all the luxury
of destruction, disaggregation, and negation,—in
him evil, purposelessness and ugliness, seem just as
allowable as they are in nature—because of his
bursting plenitude of creative and rejuvenating
powers, which are able to convert every desert into
a luxurious land of plenty. Conversely, it is the
greatest sufferer and pauper in vitality, who is most
in need of mildness, peace and goodness—that
which to-day is called humaneness—in thought as
well as in action, and possibly of a God whose
speciality is to be a God of the sick, a Saviour, and
also of logic or the abstract intelligibility of existence
even for idiots (—the typical <q>free-spirits,</q>
<pb n="067"/><anchor id="Pg067"/>
like the idealists, and <q>beautiful souls,</q> are
<hi rend='italic'>décadents</hi>—); in short, of a warm, danger-tight, and
narrow confinement, between optimistic horizons
which would allow of stultification.… And thus
very gradually, I began to understand Epicurus,
the opposite of a Dionysian Greek, and also the
Christian who in fact is only a kind of Epicurean,
and who, with his belief that <q>faith saves,</q> carries
the principle of Hedonism <emph>as far as possible</emph>—far
beyond all intellectual honesty.… If I am
ahead of all other psychologists in anything, it is
in this fact that my eyes are more keen for tracing
those most difficult and most captious of all deductions,
in which the largest number of mistakes have
been made,—the deduction which makes one infer
something concerning the author from his work,
something concerning the doer from his deed,
something concerning the idealist from the need
which produced this ideal, and something concerning
the imperious <emph>craving</emph> which stands at the
back of all thinking and valuing—In regard to all
artists of what kind soever, I shall now avail
myself of this radical distinction: does the creative
power in this case arise from a loathing of life, or
from an excessive <emph>plenitude</emph> of life? In Goethe,
for instance, an overflow of vitality was creative, in
Flaubert—hate: Flaubert, a new edition of Pascal,
but as an artist with this instinctive belief at heart:
<q><hi rend='italic'>Flaubert est toujours haissable, l'homme n'est rien,
l'œuvre est tout</hi></q>.… He tortured himself when
he wrote, just as Pascal tortured himself when he
thought—the feelings of both were inclined to
be <q>non-egoistic.</q> … <q>Disinterestedness</q>—principle
<pb n="068"/><anchor id="Pg068"/>
of decadence, the will to nonentity in art
as well as in morality.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Where Wagner Is At Home.</head>

<p>
Even at the present day, France is still the refuge
of the most intellectual and refined culture in
Europe, it remains the high school of taste: but
one must know where to find this France of taste.
The <hi rend='italic'>North-German Gazette</hi>, for instance, or whoever
expresses his sentiments in that paper, thinks
that the French are <q>barbarians,</q>—as for me, if I
had to find the <emph>blackest</emph> spot on earth, where slaves
still required to be liberated, I should turn in the
direction of Northern Germany.… But those
who form part of <emph>that select</emph> France take very
good care to <emph>conceal themselves</emph>; they are a small
body of men, and there may be some among them
who do not stand on very firm legs—a few may be
fatalists, hypochondriacs, invalids; others may be
enervated, and artificial,—such are those who would
fain be artistic,—but all the loftiness and delicacy
which still remains to this world, is in their possession.
In this France of intellect, which is also the
France of pessimism, Schopenhauer is already much
more at home than he ever was in Germany, his
principal work has already been translated twice,
and the second time so excellently that now I
prefer to read Schopenhauer in French (—he was
an <emph>accident</emph> among Germans, just as I am—the
Germans have no fingers wherewith to grasp us;
they haven't any fingers at all,—but only claws).
And I do not mention Heine—<hi rend='italic'>l'adorable Heine</hi>, as
<pb n="069"/><anchor id="Pg069"/>
they say in Paris—who long since has passed into
the flesh and blood of the more profound and more
soulful of French lyricists. How could the horned
cattle of Germany know how to deal with the
<hi rend='italic'>délicatesses</hi> of such a nature!—And as to Richard
Wagner, it is obvious, it is even glaringly obvious,
that Paris is the very <emph>soil</emph> for him, the more French
music adapts itself to the needs of <hi rend='italic'>l'âme moderne</hi>,
the more Wagnerian it will become,—it is far
enough advanced in this direction already.—In
this respect one should not allow one's self to be
misled by Wagner himself—it was simply disgraceful
on Wagner's part to scoff at Paris, as he
did, in its agony in 1871.… In spite of it all, in
Germany Wagner is only a misapprehension.—who
could be more incapable of understanding anything
about Wagner than the Kaiser, for instance?—To
everybody familiar with the movement of European
culture, this fact, however, is certain, that French
romanticism and Richard Wagner are most intimately
related. All dominated by literature, up to
their very eyes and ears—the first European artists
with a <emph>universal literary</emph> culture,—most of them
writers, poets, mediators and minglers of the senses
and the arts, all fanatics in <emph>expression</emph>, great
discoverers in the realm of the sublime as also of
the ugly and the gruesome, and still greater discoverers
in passion, in working for effect, in the art
of dressing their windows,—all possessing talent
far above their genius,—virtuosos to their backbone,
knowing of secret passages to all that seduces, lures,
constrains or overthrows; born enemies of logic
and of straight lines, thirsting after the exotic, the
<pb n="070"/><anchor id="Pg070"/>
strange and the monstrous, and all opiates for the
senses and the understanding. On the whole, a
daring dare-devil, magnificently violent, soaring
and high-springing crew of artists, who first had to
teach their own century—it is the century of the
mob—what the concept <q>artist</q> meant. But they
were <emph>ill</emph>.…
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Wagner As The Apostle Of Chastity.</head>

<div>
<head>1.</head>

<lg>
<l>Is this the German way?</l>
<l>Comes this low bleating forth from German hearts?</l>
<l>Should Teutons, sin repenting, lash themselves,</l>
<l>Or spread their palms with priestly unctuousness,</l>
<l>Exalt their feelings with the censer's fumes,</l>
<l>And cower and quake and bend the trembling knee,</l>
<l>And with a sickly sweetness plead a prayer?</l>
<l>Then ogle nuns, and ring the Ave-bell,</l>
<l>And thus with morbid fervour out-do heaven?</l>
<l>Is this the German way?</l>
<l>Beware, yet are you free, yet your own Lords.</l>
<l>What yonder lures is Rome, Rome's faith sung without words.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<head>2.</head>

<p>
There is no necessary contrast between sensuality
and chastity, every good marriage, every genuine
love affair is above this contrast; but in those cases
where the contrast exists, it is very far from being
necessarily a tragic one. This, at least, ought to
hold good of all well-constituted and good-spirited
<pb n="071"/><anchor id="Pg071"/>
mortals, who are not in the least inclined to reckon
their unstable equilibrium between angel and <hi rend='italic'>petite
bête</hi>, without further ado, among the objections to
existence, the more refined and more intelligent
like Hafis and Goethe, even regarded it as an
additional attraction. It is precisely contradictions
of this kind which lure us to life.… On the other
hand, it must be obvious, that when Circe's unfortunate
animals are induced to worship chastity, all
they see and <emph>worship</emph> therein, is their opposite—oh!
and with what tragic groaning and fervour,
may well be imagined—that same painful and
thoroughly superfluous opposition which, towards
the end of his life, Richard Wagner undoubtedly
wished to set to music and to put on the stage,
<emph>And to what purpose?</emph> we may reasonably ask.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3.</head>

<p>
And yet this other question can certainly not be
circumvented: what business had he actually with
that manly (alas! so unmanly) <q>bucolic simplicity,</q>
that poor devil and son of nature—Parsifal, whom
he ultimately makes a catholic by such insidious
means—what?—was Wagner in earnest with
Parsifal? For, that he was laughed at, I cannot
deny, any more than Gottfried Keller can.…
We should like to believe that <q>Parsifal</q> was meant
as a piece of idle gaiety, as the closing act and
satyric drama, with which Wagner the tragedian
wished to take leave of us, of himself, and above
all <emph>of tragedy</emph>, in a way which befitted him and his
dignity, that is to say, with an extravagant, lofty
and most malicious parody of tragedy itself, of all
<pb n="072"/><anchor id="Pg072"/>
the past and terrible earnestness and sorrow of this
world, of the most <emph>ridiculous</emph> form of the unnaturalness
of the ascetic ideal, at last overcome. For
Parsifal is the subject <hi rend='italic'>par excellence</hi> for a comic
opera.… Is Wagner's <q>Parsifal</q> his secret laugh
of superiority at himself, the triumph of his last and
most exalted state of artistic freedom, of artistic
transcendence—is it Wagner able to <emph>laugh</emph> at himself?
Once again we only wish it were so; for
what could Parsifal be if he were <emph>meant seriously</emph>?
Is it necessary in his case to say (as I have heard
people say) that <q>Parsifal</q> is <q>the product of the
mad hatred of knowledge, intellect, and sensuality?</q>
a curse upon the senses and the mind in
one breath and in one fit of hatred? an act of
apostasy and a return to Christianly sick and
obscurantist ideals? And finally even a denial of
self, a deletion of self, on the part of an artist who
theretofore had worked with all the power of his
will in favour of the opposite cause, the spiritualisation
and sensualisation of his art? And not only
of his art, but also of his life? Let us remember
how enthusiastically Wagner at one time walked
in the footsteps of the philosopher Feuerbach.
Feuerbach's words <q>healthy sensuality</q> struck
Wagner in the thirties and forties very much as
they struck many other Germans—they called
themselves the young Germans—that is to say, as
words of salvation. Did he ultimately <emph>change his
mind</emph> on this point? It would seem that he had
at least had the desire of <emph>changing</emph> his doctrine
towards the end.… Had the <emph>hatred of life</emph> become
dominant in him as in Flaubert? For <q>Parsifal</q>
<pb n="073"/><anchor id="Pg073"/>
is a work of rancour, of revenge, of the most secret
concoction of poisons with which to make an end
of the first conditions of life, <emph>it is a bad work</emph>.
The preaching of chastity remains an incitement
to unnaturalness: I despise anybody who does not
regard <q>Parsifal</q> as an outrage upon morality.—
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>How I Got Rid Of Wagner.</head>

<div>
<head>1.</head>

<p>
Already in the summer of 1876, when the first
festival at Bayreuth was at its height, I took leave
of Wagner in my soul. I cannot endure anything
double-faced. Since Wagner had returned to
Germany, he had condescended step by step to
everything that I despise—even to anti-Semitism.…
As a matter of fact, it was then high time to
bid him farewell: but the proof of this came only
too soon. Richard Wagner, ostensibly the most
triumphant creature alive; as a matter of fact,
though, a cranky and desperate <hi rend='italic'>décadent</hi>, suddenly
fell helpless and broken on his knees before the
Christian cross.… Was there no German at that
time who had the eyes to see, and the sympathy in
his soul to feel, the ghastly nature of this spectacle?
Was I the only one who <emph>suffered</emph> from it?—Enough,
the unexpected event, like a flash of lightning,
made me see only too clearly what kind of a place
it was that I had just left,—and it also made me
shudder as a man shudders who unawares has just
escaped a great danger. As I continued my
journey alone, I trembled. Not long after this I
<pb n="074"/><anchor id="Pg074"/>
was ill, more than ill—I was <emph>tired</emph>;—tired of the
continual disappointments over everything which
remained for us modern men to be enthusiastic
about, of the energy, industry, hope, youth, and
love that are <emph>squandered everywhere</emph>; tired out of
loathing for the whole world of idealistic lying and
conscience-softening, which, once again, in the case
of Wagner, had scored a victory over a man who
was of the bravest; and last but not least, tired by
the sadness of a ruthless suspicion—that I was now
condemned to be ever more and more suspicious,
ever more and more contemptuous, ever more and
more <emph>deeply</emph> alone than I had been theretofore.
For I had no one save Richard Wagner.… I was
always condemned to the society of Germans.…
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2.</head>

<p>
Henceforward alone and cruelly distrustful of
myself, I then took up sides—not without anger—<emph>against
myself</emph> and <emph>for</emph> all that which hurt me and
fell hard upon me; and thus I found the road to
that courageous pessimism which is the opposite of
all idealistic falsehood, and which, as it seems to
me, is also the road to <emph>me</emph>—<emph>to my mission</emph>.…
That hidden and dominating thing, for which for
long ages we have had no name, until ultimately
it comes forth as our mission,—this tyrant in us
wreaks a terrible revenge upon us for every attempt
we make either to evade him or to escape him, for
every one of our experiments in the way of befriending
people to whom we do not belong, for
every active occupation, however estimable, which
may make us diverge from our principal object:—aye,
<pb n="075"/><anchor id="Pg075"/>
and even for every virtue which would fain
protect us from the rigour of our most intimate
sense of responsibility. Illness is always the
answer, whenever we venture to doubt our right to
<emph>our</emph> mission, whenever we begin to make things too
easy for ourselves. Curious and terrible at the
same time! It is for our relaxation that we have
to pay most dearly! And should we wish after
all to return to health, we then have no choice:
we are compelled to burden ourselves <emph>more</emph> heavily
than we had been burdened before.…
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Psychologist Speaks.</head>

<div>
<head>1.</head>

<p>
The oftener a psychologist—a born, an unavoidable
psychologist and soul-diviner—turns his attention
to the more select cases and individuals, the
greater becomes his danger of being suffocated by
sympathy: he needs greater hardness and cheerfulness
than any other man. For the corruption, the
ruination of higher men, is in fact the rule: it is
terrible to have such a rule always before our eyes.
The manifold torments of the psychologist who
has discovered this ruination, who discovers once,
and then discovers almost repeatedly throughout
all history, this universal inner <q>hopelessness</q> of
higher men, this eternal <q>too late!</q> in every sense—may
perhaps one day be the cause of his <q>going
to the dogs</q> himself. In almost every psychologist
we may see a tell-tale predilection in favour of
intercourse with commonplace and well-ordered
<pb n="076"/><anchor id="Pg076"/>
men: and this betrays how constantly he requires
healing, that he needs a sort of flight and forgetfulness,
away from what his insight and incisiveness—from
what his <q>business</q>—has laid upon his conscience.
A horror of his memory is typical of
him. He is easily silenced by the judgment of
others, he hears with unmoved countenance how
people honour, admire, love, and glorify, where he
has opened his eyes and <emph>seen</emph>—or he even conceals
his silence by expressly agreeing with some obvious
opinion. Perhaps the paradox of his situation
becomes so dreadful that, precisely where he has
learnt <emph>great sympathy</emph>, together with <emph>great contempt</emph>,
the educated have on their part learnt great
reverence. And who knows but in all great
instances, just this alone happened: that the multitude
worshipped a God, and that the <q>God</q> was
only a poor sacrificial animal! <emph>Success</emph> has always
been the greatest liar—and the <q>work</q> itself, the
<emph>deed</emph>, is a success too; the great statesman, the
conqueror, the discoverer, are disguised in their
creations until they can no longer be recognised,
the <q>work</q> of the artist, of the philosopher, only
invents him who has created it, who is reputed to
have created it, the <q>great men,</q> as they are
reverenced, are poor little fictions composed afterwards;
in the world of historical values counterfeit
coinage <emph>prevails</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2.</head>

<p>
Those great poets, for example, such as Byron,
Musset, Poe, Leopardi, Kleist, Gogol (I do not
dare to mention much greater names, but I imply
<pb n="077"/><anchor id="Pg077"/>
them), as they now appear, and were perhaps
obliged to be: men of the moment, sensuous,
absurd, versatile, light-minded and quick to trust
and to distrust, with souls in which usually some
flaw has to be concealed, often taking revenge
with their works for an internal blemish, often
seeking forgetfulness in their soaring from a too
accurate memory, idealists out of proximity to the
mud:—what a <emph>torment</emph> these great artists are and
the so-called higher men in general, to him who
has once found them out! We are all special
pleaders in the cause of mediocrity. It is conceivable
that it is just from woman—who is clairvoyant
in the world of suffering, and, alas! also
unfortunately eager to help and save to an extent
far beyond her powers—that <emph>they</emph> have learnt so
readily those outbreaks of boundless <emph>sympathy</emph>
which the multitude, above all the reverent multitude,
overwhelms with prying and self-gratifying
interpretations. This sympathising invariably deceives
itself as to its power; woman would like to
believe that love can do <emph>everything</emph>—it is the
<emph>superstition</emph> peculiar to her. Alas, he who knows
the heart finds out how poor, helpless, pretentious,
and blundering even the best and deepest love is—how
much more readily it <emph>destroys</emph> than saves.…
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3.</head>

<p>
The intellectual loathing and haughtiness of
every man who has suffered deeply—the extent
to which a man can suffer, almost determines the
order of rank—the chilling uncertainty with which
he is thoroughly imbued and coloured, that by
<pb n="078"/><anchor id="Pg078"/>
virtue of his suffering he <emph>knows more</emph> than the
shrewdest and wisest can ever know, that he has
been familiar with, and <q>at home</q> in many distant
terrible worlds of which <q><emph>you</emph> know nothing!</q>—this
silent intellectual haughtiness, this pride of
the elect of knowledge, of the <q>initiated,</q> of the
almost sacrificed, finds all forms of disguise necessary
to protect itself from contact with gushing
and sympathising hands, and in general from all
that is not its equal in suffering. Profound suffering
makes noble; it separates.—One of the most
refined forms of disguise is Epicurism, along with
a certain ostentatious boldness of taste which takes
suffering lightly, and puts itself on the defensive
against all that is sorrowful and profound. There
are <q>cheerful men</q> who make use of good spirits,
because they are misunderstood on account of
them—they <emph>wish</emph> to be misunderstood. There are
<q>scientific minds</q> who make use of science, because
it gives a cheerful appearance, and because love of
science leads people to conclude that a person is
shallow—they <emph>wish</emph> to mislead to a false conclusion.
There are free insolent spirits which
would fain conceal and deny that they are at
bottom broken, incurable hearts—this is Hamlet's
case: and then folly itself can be the mask of
an unfortunate and alas! all too dead-certain
knowledge.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="079"/><anchor id="Pg079"/>

<div>
<head>Epilogue.</head>

<div>
<head>1.</head>

<p>
I have often asked myself whether I am not much
more deeply indebted to the hardest years of my
life than to any others. According to the voice
of my innermost nature, everything necessary,
seen from above and in the light of a <emph>superior</emph>
economy, is also useful in itself—not only should
one bear it, one should <emph>love</emph> it.… <hi rend='italic'>Amor fati</hi>:
this is the very core of my being—And as to my
prolonged illness, do I not owe much more to it
than I owe to my health? To it I owe a <emph>higher</emph>
kind of health, a sort of health which grows
stronger under everything that does not actually
kill it!—<emph>To it, I owe even my philosophy</emph>.… Only
great suffering is the ultimate emancipator of
spirit, for it teaches one that <emph>vast suspiciousness</emph>
which makes an X out of every U, a genuine and
proper X, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the antepenultimate letter. Only
great suffering; that great suffering, under which
we seem to be over a fire of greenwood, the suffering
that takes its time—forces us philosophers to
descend into our nethermost depths, and to let go
of all trustfulness, all good-nature, all whittling-down,
all mildness, all mediocrity,—on which
things we had formerly staked our humanity. I
doubt whether such suffering improves a man; but
I know that it makes him <emph>deeper</emph>.… Supposing
we learn to set our pride, our scorn, our strength
of will against it, and thus resemble the Indian
<pb n="080"/><anchor id="Pg080"/>
who, however cruelly he may be tortured, considers
himself revenged on his tormentor by the bitterness
of his own tongue. Supposing we withdraw from
pain into nonentity, into the deaf, dumb, and rigid
sphere of self-surrender, self-forgetfulness, self-effacement:
one is another person when one leaves
these protracted and dangerous exercises in the
art of self-mastery, one has one note of interrogation
the more, and above all one has the will
henceforward to ask more, deeper, sterner, harder,
more wicked, and more silent questions, than anyone
has ever asked on earth before.… Trust in
life has vanished; life itself has become a <emph>problem</emph>.—But
let no one think that one has therefore
become a spirit of gloom or a blind owl! Even
love of life is still possible,—but it is a <emph>different
kind</emph> of love.… It is the love for a woman whom
we doubt.…
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2.</head>

<p>
The rarest of all things is this: to have after all
another taste—a <emph>second</emph> taste. Out of such abysses,
out of the abyss of <emph>great suspicion</emph> as well, a man
returns as though born again, he has a new skin,
he is more susceptible, more full of wickedness;
he has a finer taste for joyfulness; he has a more
sensitive tongue for all good things; his senses are
more cheerful; he has acquired a second, more
dangerous, innocence in gladness; he is more
childish too, and a hundred times more cunning
than ever he had been before.
</p>

<p>
Oh, how much more repulsive pleasure now is to
him, that coarse, heavy, buff-coloured pleasure,
<pb n="081"/><anchor id="Pg081"/>
which is understood by our pleasure-seekers, our
<q>cultured people,</q> our wealthy folk and our rulers!
With how much more irony we now listen to the
hubbub as of a country fair, with which the
<q>cultured</q> man and the man about town allow
themselves to be forced through art, literature,
music, and with the help of intoxicating liquor, to
<q>intellectual enjoyments.</q> How the stage-cry of
passion now stings our ears; how strange to our
taste the whole romantic riot and sensuous bustle,
which the cultured mob are so fond of, together
with its aspirations to the sublime, to the exalted
and the distorted, have become. No: if we convalescents
require an art at all, it is <emph>another</emph> art—-a
mocking, nimble, volatile, divinely undisturbed,
divinely artificial art, which blazes up like pure
flame into a cloudless sky! But above all, an art
for artists, <emph>only for artists</emph>! We are, after all, more
conversant with that which is in the highest degree
necessary—cheerfulness, <emph>every kind</emph> of cheerfulness,
my friends!… We men of knowledge, now know
something only too well: oh how well we have
learnt by this time, to forget, <emph>not</emph> to know, as
artists!… As to our future: we shall scarcely
be found on the track of those Egyptian youths
who break into temples at night, who embrace
statues, and would fain unveil, strip, and set in
broad daylight, everything which there are excellent
reasons to keep concealed.<note place="foot">An allusion to
Schiller's poem: <q>Das verschleierte Bild zu
Sais.</q>—<hi rend='italic'>Tr.</hi></note>
No, we are disgusted
with this bad taste, this will to truth, this search
<pb n="082"/><anchor id="Pg082"/>
after truth <q>at all costs;</q> this madness of adolescence,
<q>the love of truth;</q> we are now too
experienced, too serious, too joyful, too scorched,
<emph>too profound</emph> for that.… We no longer believe
that truth remains truth when it is <emph>unveiled</emph>,—we
have lived enough to understand this.… To-day
it seems to us good form not to strip everything
naked, not to be present at all things, not to
desire to <q>know</q> all. <q><hi rend='italic'>Tout comprendre c'est tout
mépriser.</hi></q>… <q>Is it true,</q> a little girl once asked
her mother, <q>that the beloved Father is everywhere?—I
think it quite improper,</q>—a hint to
philosophers.… The shame with which Nature
has concealed herself behind riddles and enigmas
should be held in higher esteem. Perhaps truth
is a woman who has reasons for <emph>not revealing her
reasons?</emph>… Perhaps her name, to use a Greek
word is <hi rend='italic'>Baubo</hi>?—Oh these Greeks, they understood
the art of <emph>living!</emph> For this it is needful to halt
bravely at the surface, at the fold, at the skin, to
worship appearance, and to believe in forms, tones,
words, and the whole <emph>Olympus of appearance</emph>!
These Greeks were superficial—from <emph>profundity</emph>.… And
are we not returning to precisely the
same thing, we dare-devils of intellect who have
scaled the highest and most dangerous pinnacles
of present thought, in order to look around us from
that height, in order to <emph>look down</emph> from that height?
Are we not precisely in this respect—<emph>Greeks</emph>?
Worshippers of form, of tones, of words? Precisely
on that account—<emph>artists</emph>?
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n="085"/><anchor id="Pg085"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Selected Aphorisms from Nietzsche's Retrospect of his Years of
Friendship with Wagner.</head>

<div>
<head>(<hi rend='italic'>Summer 1878.</hi>)</head>

<div>
<head>1.</head>

<p>
My blunder was this, I travelled to Bayreuth with
an ideal in my breast, and was thus doomed to
experience the bitterest disappointment. The
preponderance of ugliness, grotesqueness and
strong pepper thoroughly repelled me.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2.</head>

<p>
I utterly disagree with those who were dissatisfied
with the decorations, the scenery and the mechanical
contrivances at Bayreuth. Far too much industry
and ingenuity was applied to the task of chaining
the imagination to matters which did not belie
their <emph>epic</emph> origin. But as to the naturalism of
the attitudes, of the singing, compared with the
orchestra!! What affected, artificial and depraved
tones, what a distortion of nature, were we made
to hear!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3.</head>

<p>
We are witnessing the death agony of the <emph>last
Art</emph>: Bayreuth has convinced me of this.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="086"/><anchor id="Pg086"/>

<div>
<head>4.</head>

<p>
My picture of Wagner, completely surpassed
him; I had depicted an <emph>ideal monster</emph>—one, however,
which is perhaps quite capable of kindling
the enthusiasm of artists. The real Wagner,
Bayreuth as it actually is, was only like a bad,
final proof, pulled on inferior paper from the
engraving which was my creation. My longing
to see real men and their motives, received an
extraordinary impetus from this humiliating
experience.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>5.</head>

<p>
This, to my sorrow, is what I realised; a good
deal even struck me with sudden fear. At last
I felt, however, that if only I could be strong
enough to take sides against myself and what I
most loved I would find the road to truth and
get solace and encouragement from it—and in this
way I became filled with a sensation of joy far
greater than that upon which I was now voluntarily
turning my back.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>6.</head>

<p>
I was in love with art, passionately in love, and
in the whole of existence saw nothing else than
art—and this at an age when, reasonably enough,
quite different passions usually possess the soul.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>7.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Goethe</hi> said: <q>The yearning spirit within me,
which in earlier years I may perhaps have fostered
too earnestly, and which as I grew older I tried my
utmost to combat, did not seem becoming in the
<pb n="087"/><anchor id="Pg087"/>
man, and I therefore had to strive to attain to
more complete freedom.</q> Conclusion?—I have
had to do the same.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>8.</head>

<p>
He who wakes us always wounds us.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>9.</head>

<p>
I do not possess the talent of being loyal, and
what is still worse, I have not even the vanity to
try to appear as if I did.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>10.</head>

<p>
He who accomplishes anything that lies beyond
the vision and the experience of his acquaintances,—provokes
envy and hatred masked as pity,—prejudice
regards the work as decadence, disease,
seduction. Long faces.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>11.</head>

<p>
I frankly confess that I had hoped that by
means of art the Germans would become thoroughly
disgusted with <emph>decaying Christianity</emph>—I regarded
German mythology as a solvent, as a means of
accustoming people to polytheism.
</p>

<p>
What a fright I had over the Catholic revival!!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>12.</head>

<p>
It is possible neither to suffer sufficiently acutely
from life, nor to be so lifeless and emotionally weak,
as to have <emph>need</emph> of Wagner's art, as to require it as
a medium. This is the principal reason of one's
<emph>opposition</emph> to it, and not baser motives; something
<pb n="088"/><anchor id="Pg088"/>
to which we are not driven by any personal need,
and which we do not <emph>require</emph>, we cannot esteem so
highly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>13.</head>

<p>
It is a question either of no longer <emph>requiring</emph>
Wagner's art, or of still requiring it.
</p>

<p>
Gigantic forces lie concealed in it: <emph>it drives one
beyond its own domain</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>14.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Goethe</hi> said: <q>Are not Byron's audacity, sprightliness
and grandeur all creative? We must beware
of always looking for this quality in that which is
perfectly pure and moral. All <emph>greatness</emph> is creative
the moment we realise it.</q> This should be applied
to Wagner's art.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>15.</head>

<p>
We shall always have to credit Wagner with
the fact that in the second half of the nineteenth
century he impressed art upon our memory as an
important and magnificent thing. True, he did
this in his own fashion, and this was not the
fashion of upright and far-seeing men.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>16.</head>

<p>
Wagner <emph>versus</emph> the cautious, the cold and the
contented of the world—in this lies his greatness—he
is a stranger to his age—he combats the
frivolous and the super-smart—But he also fights
the just, the moderate, those who delight in the
world (like Goethe), and the mild, the people of
charm, the scientific among men—this is the reverse
of the medal.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="089"/><anchor id="Pg089"/>

<div>
<head>17.</head>

<p>
Our youth was up in arms against the <emph>soberness</emph>
of the age. It plunged into the cult of excess, of
passion, of ecstasy, and of the blackest and most
austere conception of the world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>18.</head>

<p>
Wagner pursues one form of madness, the age
another form. Both carry on their chase at the
same speed, each is as blind and as unjust as the
other.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>19.</head>

<p>
It is very difficult to trace the course of Wagner's
inner development—no trust must be placed in
his own description of his soul's experiences. He
writes party-pamphlets for his followers.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>20.</head>

<p>
It is extremely doubtful whether Wagner is able
to bear witness about himself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>21.</head>

<p>
There are men who try in vain to make a
principle out of <emph>themselves</emph>. This was the case
with Wagner.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>22.</head>

<p>
Wagner's obscurity concerning final aims; his
non-antique fogginess.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>23.</head>

<p>
All Wagner's ideas straightway become manias;
he is <emph>tyrannised</emph> over by them. How can <emph>such a
man allow himself to be tyrannised over in this
<pb n="090"/><anchor id="Pg090"/>
way</emph>! For instance by his hatred of Jews. He
<emph>kills</emph> his themes like his <q>ideas,</q> by means of his
violent love of repeating them. The problem of
excessive length and breadth; he bores us with
his raptures.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>24.</head>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>C'est la rage de voulour penser et sentir au delà
de sa force</hi></q> (Doudan). The Wagnerites.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>25.</head>

<p>
Wagner whose ambition far exceeds his natural
gifts, has tried an incalculable number of times
to achieve what lay beyond his powers—but it
almost makes one shudder to see some one assail
with such persistence that which defies conquest—the
fate of his constitution.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>26.</head>

<p>
He is always thinking of the most <emph>extreme</emph>
expression,—in every word. But in the end
superlatives begin to pall.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>27.</head>

<p>
There is something which is in the highest
degree suspicious in Wagner, and that is Wagner's
suspicion. It is such a strong trait in him, that
on two occasions I doubted whether he were a
musician at all.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>28.</head>

<p>
The proposition: <q>in the face of perfection
there is no salvation save love,</q><note place="foot">What
Schiller said of Goethe.—<hi rend='italic'>Tr.</hi></note> is thoroughly
<pb n="091"/><anchor id="Pg091"/>
Wagnerian. Profound jealousy of everything
great from which he can draw <emph>fresh</emph> ideas. Hatred
of all that which he cannot approach, the
Renaissance, French and Greek art in style.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>29.</head>

<p>
Wagner is jealous of all periods that have shown
<emph>restraint</emph>: he despises beauty and grace, and finds
only his own <emph>virtues</emph> in the <q>Germans,</q> and even
attributes all his failings to them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>30.</head>

<p>
Wagner has not the power to unlock and
liberate the soul of those he frequents. Wagner
is not sure of himself, but distrustful and arrogant.
His <emph>art</emph> has this effect upon artists, it is envious
of all rivals.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>31.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Plato's Envy.</hi> He would fain monopolise
Socrates. He saturates the latter with himself,
pretends to adorn him (καλὸς Σωκράτης), and tries to
separate all Socratists from him in order himself
to appear as the only true apostle. But his
historical presentation of him is false, even to a
parlous degree: just as Wagner's presentation of
Beethoven and Shakespeare is false.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>32.</head>

<p>
When a dramatist speaks about himself he plays
a part: this is inevitable. When Wagner speaks
about Bach and Beethoven he speaks like one for
whom he would fain be taken. But he impresses
<pb n="092"/><anchor id="Pg092"/>
only those who are already convinced, for his
dissimulation and his genuine nature are far too
violently at variance.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>33.</head>

<p>
Wagner struggles against the <q>frivolity</q> in his
nature, which to him the ignoble (as opposed to
Goethe) constituted the joy of life.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>34.</head>

<p>
Wagner has the mind of the ordinary man who
prefers to trace things to <emph>one</emph> cause. The Jews
do the same: one <emph>aim</emph>, therefore one Saviour.
In this way he simplifies German and culture;
wrongly but strongly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>35.</head>

<p>
Wagner admitted all this to himself often enough
when in private communion with his soul. I only
wish he had also admitted it publicly. For what
constitutes the greatness of a character if it is not
this, that he who possesses it is able to take sides
even against himself in favour of truth.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Wagner's Teutonism.</hi></head>

<div>
<head>36.</head>

<p>
That which is un-German in Wagner. He
lacks the German charm and grace of a Beethoven,
a Mozart, a Weber; he also lacks the flowing,
cheerful fire (<hi rend='italic'>Allegro con brio</hi>) of Beethoven and
Weber. He cannot be free and easy without
being grotesque. He lacks modesty, indulges in
<pb n="093"/><anchor id="Pg093"/>
big drums, and always tends to surcharge his
effect. He is not the good official that Bach was.
Neither has he that Goethean calm in regard
to his rivals.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>37.</head>

<p>
Wagner always reaches the high-water mark
of his vanity when he speaks of the German nature
(incidentally it is also the height of his imprudence);
for, if Frederick the Great's justice, Goethe's nobility
and freedom from envy, Beethoven's sublime
resignation, Bach's delicately transfigured spiritual
life,—if steady work performed without any thought
of glory and success, and without envy, constitute
the true <emph>German</emph> qualities, would it not seem as if
Wagner almost wished to prove he is no German?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>38.</head>

<p>
Terrible wildness, abject sorrow, emptiness,
the shudder of joy, unexpectedness,—in short all
the qualities peculiar to the Semitic race! I
believe that the Jews approach Wagner's art with
more understanding than the Aryans do.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>39.</head>

<p>
A passage concerning the Jews, taken from
Taine.—As it happens, I have misled the reader,
the passage does not concern Wagner at all.—But
can it be possible that Wagner is a Jew? In that
case we could readily understand his dislike of
Jews.<note place="foot">See note on <ref target="Pg037">page 37</ref>.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n="094"/><anchor id="Pg094"/>

<div>
<head>40.</head>

<p>
Wagner's art is absolutely the <emph>art of the age</emph>: an
æsthetic age would have rejected it. The more
subtle people amongst us actually do reject it even
now. The <emph>coarsifying</emph> of everything æsthetic.—Compared
with Goethe's ideal it is very far behind.
The moral contrast of these self-indulgent burningly
loyal creatures of Wagner, acts like a <emph>spur</emph>, like an
irritant and even this sensation is turned to account
in obtaining an <emph>effect</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>41.</head>

<p>
What is it in our age that Wagner's art expresses?
That brutality and most delicate weakness which
exist side by side, that running wild of natural
instincts, and nervous hyper-sensitiveness, that
thirst for emotion which arises from fatigue and
the love of fatigue.—All this is understood by the
Wagnerites.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>42.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Stupefaction or intoxication</hi> constitute all Wagnerian
art. On the other hand I could mention
instances in which Wagner stands <emph>higher</emph>, in which
real joy flows from him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>43.</head>

<p>
The reason why the figures in Wagner's art
behave so madly, is because he greatly feared lest
people would doubt that they were alive.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>44.</head>

<p>
Wagner's art is an appeal to inartistic people; all
means are welcomed which help towards obtaining
<pb n="095"/><anchor id="Pg095"/>
an effect. It is calculated not to produce an
<emph>artistic effect</emph> but an effect upon the <emph>nerves in
general</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>45.</head>

<p>
Apparently in Wagner we have an art <emph>for everybody</emph>,
because coarse and subtle means seem to
be united in it. Albeit its pre-requisite may be
musico-æsthetic education, and <emph>particularly</emph> with
<emph>moral</emph> indifference.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>46.</head>

<p>
In Wagner we find the most ambitious <emph>combination</emph>
of all means with the view of obtaining the
strongest effect whereas genuine musicians quietly
develop individual <hi rend='italic'>genres</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>47.</head>

<p>
Dramatists are <emph>borrowers</emph>—their principal source
of wealth—artistic thoughts drawn from the epos.
Wagner borrowed from classical music besides.
Dramatists are constructive geniuses, they are not
inventive and original as the epic poets are. Drama
takes a lower rank than the epos: it presupposes
a coarser and more democratic public.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>48.</head>

<p>
Wagner does not altogether trust <emph>music</emph>. He
weaves kindred sensations into it in order to lend
it the character of greatness. He measures himself
on others; he first of all gives his listeners intoxicating
drinks in order to lead them into believing
that it <emph>was the music that intoxicated them</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="096"/><anchor id="Pg096"/>

<div>
<head>49.</head>

<p>
The same amount of talent and industry which
makes the classic, when it appears some time <emph>too
late</emph>, also makes the baroque artist like Wagner.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>50.</head>

<p>
Wagner's art is calculated to appeal to short-sighted
people—one has to get much too close
up to it (Miniature): it also appeals to long-sighted
people, but not to those with normal sight.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Contradictions in the Idea of Musical Drama.</hi></head>

<div>
<head>51.</head>

<p>
Just listen to the second act of the <q>Götterdämmerung,</q>
without the drama. It is chaotic music, as
wild as a bad dream, and it is as frightfully distinct
as if it desired to make itself clear even to deaf
people. This volubility <emph>with nothing to say</emph> is
alarming. Compared with it the drama is a genuine
relief.—Is the fact that this music when heard
alone, is, as a whole intolerable (apart from a few
intentionally isolated parts) in its <emph>favour</emph>? Suffice
it to say that this music without its accompanying
drama, is a perpetual contradiction of all the highest
laws of style belonging to older music: he who
thoroughly accustoms himself to it, loses all feeling
for these laws. But has the drama <emph>been improved</emph>
thanks to this addition? A <emph>symbolic interpretation</emph>
has been affixed to it, a sort of philological commentary,
which sets fetters upon the inner and free
understanding of the imagination—it is tyrannical.
<pb n="097"/><anchor id="Pg097"/>
Music is the language of the commentator, who talks
the whole of the time and gives us no breathing
space. Moreover his is a difficult language which
also requires to be explained. He who step by
step has mastered, first the libretto (language!),
then converted it into action in his mind's eye,
then sought out and understood, and became
familiar with the musical symbolism thereto: aye,
and has fallen in love with all three things: such
a man then experiences a great joy. But how
<emph>exacting</emph>! It is quite impossible to do this save
for a few short moments,—such tenfold attention
on the part of one's eyes, ears, understanding, and
feeling, such acute activity in apprehending without
any productive reaction, is far too exhausting!—Only
the very fewest behave in this way: how is
it then that so many are affected? Because most
people are only intermittingly attentive, and are
inattentive for sometimes whole passages at a
stretch; because they bestow their undivided
attention now upon the music, later upon the
drama, and anon upon the scenery—that is to say
they <emph>take the work to pieces</emph>.—But in this way the
kind of work we are discussing is condemned: not
the drama but a moment of it is the result, an
arbitrary selection. The creator of a new <hi rend='italic'>genre</hi>
should consider this! The arts should not always
be dished up together,—but we should imitate the
moderation of the ancients which is truer to human
nature.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>52.</head>

<p>
Wagner reminds one of lava which blocks its
own course by congealing, and suddenly finds
<pb n="098"/><anchor id="Pg098"/>
itself checked by dams which it has itself built.
There is no <hi rend='italic'>Allegro con fuoco</hi> for him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>53.</head>

<p>
I compare Wagner's music, which would fain
have the same effect as speech, with that kind of
sculptural relief which would have the same effect
as painting. The highest laws of style are violated,
and that which is most sublime can no longer be
achieved.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>54.</head>

<p>
The general heaving, undulating and rolling of
Wagner's art.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>55.</head>

<p>
In regard to Wagner's rejection of form, we
are reminded of Goethe's remark in conversation
with Eckermann: <q>there is no great art in being
brilliant if one respects nothing.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>56.</head>

<p>
Once one theme is over, Wagner is always
embarrassed as to how to continue. Hence the
long preparation, the suspense. His peculiar
craftiness consisted in transvaluing his weakness
into virtues.—
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>57.</head>

<p>
The <emph>lack</emph> of melody and the poverty of melody
in Wagner. Melody is a whole consisting of many
beautiful proportions, it is the reflection of a well-ordered
soul. He strives after melody; but if he
finds one, he almost suffocates it in his embrace.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="099"/><anchor id="Pg099"/>

<div>
<head>58.</head>

<p>
The natural nobility of a Bach and a Beethoven,
the beautiful soul (even of a Mendelssohn) are
wanting in Wagner. He is one degree lower.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>59.</head>

<p>
Wagner imitates himself again and again—mannerisms.
That is why he was the quickest
among musicians to be imitated. It is so easy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>60.</head>

<p>
Mendelssohn who lacked the power of radically
staggering one (incidentally this was the talent of
the Jews in the Old Testament), makes up for
this by the things which were his own, that is to
say: freedom within the law, and noble emotions
kept within the limits of beauty.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>61.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Liszt</hi>, the first <emph>representative</emph> of all musicians,
but <emph>no musician</emph>. He was the prince, not the statesman.
The conglomerate of a hundred musicians'
souls, but not enough of a personality to cast
his own shadow upon them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>62.</head>

<p>
The most wholesome phenomenon is <hi rend='italic'>Brahms</hi>,
in whose music there is more German blood than
in that of Wagner's. With these words I would
say something complimentary, but by no means
wholly so.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>

<div>
<head>63.</head>

<p>
In Wagner's writings there is no greatness or
peace, but presumption. Why?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>64.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Wagner's Style.</hi>—The habit he acquired, from
his earliest days, of having his say in the most
important matters without a sufficient knowledge
of them, has rendered him the obscure and incomprehensible
writer that he is. In addition to this
he aspired to imitating the witty newspaper
article, and finally acquired that presumption which
readily joins hands with carelessness <q>and, behold,
it was very good.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>65.</head>

<p>
I am alarmed at the thought of how much
pleasure I could find in Wagner's style, which is
so careless as to be unworthy of such an artist.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>66.</head>

<p>
In Wagner, as in Brahms, there is a blind denial
of the healthy, in his followers this denial is
deliberate and conscious.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>67.</head>

<p>
Wagner's art is for those who are conscious
of an essential blunder in the conduct of their
lives. They feel either that they have checked a
great nature by a base occupation, or squandered
it through idle pursuits, a conventional marriage,
&amp;c. &amp;c.
</p>

<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>

<p>
In this quarter the condemnation of the world
is the outcome of the condemnation of the ego.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>68.</head>

<p>
Wagnerites do not wish to alter themselves in
any way, they live discontentedly in insipid,
conventional and brutal circumstances—only at
intervals does art have to raise them as by magic
above these things. Weakness of will.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>69.</head>

<p>
Wagner's art is for scholars who do not dare to
become philosophers: they feel discontented with
themselves and are generally in a state of obtuse
stupefaction—from time to time they take a bath
in the <emph>opposite conditions</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>70.</head>

<p>
I feel as if I had recovered from an illness:
with a feeling of unutterable joy I think of Mozart's
<hi rend='italic'>Requiem</hi>. I can once more enjoy simple fare.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>71.</head>

<p>
I understand Sophocles' development through
and through—it was the repugnance to pomp and
pageantry.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>72.</head>

<p>
I gained an insight into the injustice of <emph>idealism</emph>,
by noticing that I avenged myself on Wagner for
the disappointed hopes I had cherished of him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>73.</head>

<p>
I leave my loftiest duty to the end, and that is
to thank Wagner and Schopenhauer publicly, and
<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>
to make them as it were take sides against
themselves.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>74.</head>

<p>
I counsel everybody not to fight shy of such
paths (Wagner and Schopenhauer). The wholly
<emph>unphilosophic</emph> feeling of remorse, has become quite
strange to me.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head><hi rend='italic'>Wagner's Effects.</hi></head>

<div>
<head>75.</head>

<p>
We must strive to oppose the false after-effects
of Wagner's art. If he, in order to create Parsifal,
is forced to pump fresh strength from religious
sources, this is not an example but a danger.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>76.</head>

<p>
I entertain the fear that the effects of Wagner's
art will ultimately pour into that torrent which
takes its rise on the other side of the mountains,
and which knows how to flow even over mountains.<note place="foot">It
should be noted that the German Catholic party is
called the Ultramontane Party. The river which can thus
flow over mountains is Catholicism, towards which Nietzsche
thought Wagner's art to be tending.—<hi rend='italic'>Tr.</hi></note>
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
<!-- Local Variables: -->
<!-- coding:utf-8-unix -->
<!-- End: -->
</TEI.2>
